Document de base: Mental health
Mental health encompasses emotional, psychological, and social well-being, influencing cognition, perception, and behavior. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), it is a "state of well-being in which the individual realizes his or her abilities, can cope with the normal stresses of life, can work productively and fruitfully, and can contribute to his or her community". It likewise determines how an individual handles stress, interpersonal relationships, and decision-making. Mental health includes subjective well-being, perceived self-efficacy, autonomy, competence, intergenerational dependence,  and self-actualization of one's intellectual and emotional potential, among others.
From the perspectives of positive psychology or holism, mental health may include an individual's ability to enjoy life and to create a balance between life activities and efforts to achieve psychological resilience. Cultural differences, personal philosophy, subjective assessments, and competing professional theories all affect how one defines "mental health". Some early signs related to mental health difficulties are sleep irritation, lack of energy, lack of appetite, thinking of harming oneself or others, self-isolating (though introversion and isolation aren't necessarily unhealthy), and frequently zoning out.


== Mental disorders ==

Mental health, as defined by the Public Health Agency of Canada, is an individual's capacity to feel, think, and act in ways to achieve a better quality of life while respecting personal, social, and cultural boundaries. Impairment of any of these are risk factor for mental disorders, or mental illnesses, which are a component of mental health. In 2019, about 970 million people worldwide suffered from a mental disorder, with anxiety and depression being the most common. The number of people suffering from mental disorders has risen significantly throughout the years. Mental disorders are defined as health conditions that affect and alter cognitive functioning, emotional responses, and behavior associated with distress and/or impaired functioning. The ICD-11 is the global standard used to diagnose, treat, research, and report various mental disorders. In the United States, the DSM-5 is used as the classification system of mental disorders.
Mental health is associated with a number of lifestyle factors such as diet, exercise, stress, drug abuse, social connections and interactions. Psychiatrists, psychologists, licensed professional clinical counselors, social workers, nurse practitioners, and family physicians can help manage mental illness with treatments such as therapy, counseling, and medication.


== History ==


=== Early history ===

In the mid-19th century, William Sweetser was the first to coin the term mental hygiene, which can be seen as the precursor to contemporary approaches to work on promoting positive mental health. Isaac Ray, the fourth president of the American Psychiatric Association and one of its founders, further defined mental hygiene as "the art of preserving the mind against all incidents and influences calculated to deteriorate its qualities, impair its energies, or derange its movements".
In American history, mentally ill patients were thought to be religiously punished. This response persisted through the 1700s, along with the inhumane confinement and stigmatization of such individuals. Dorothea Dix (1802–1887) was an important figure in the development of the "mental hygiene" movement. Dix was a school teacher who endeavored to help people with mental disorders and to expose the sub-standard conditions into which they were put. This became known as the "mental hygiene movement". Before this movement, it was not uncommon that people affected by mental illness would be considerably neglected, often left alone in deplorable conditions without sufficient clothing. From 1840 to 1880, she won the support of the federal government to set up over 30 state psychiatric hospitals; however, they were understaffed, under-resourced, and were accused of violating human rights.
Emil Kraepelin in 1896 developed the taxonomy of mental disorders which has dominated the field for nearly 80 years. Later, the proposed disease model of abnormality was subjected to analysis and considered normality to be relative to the physical, geographical and cultural aspects of the defining group.
At the beginning of the 20th century, Clifford Beers founded "Mental Health America – National Committee for Mental Hygiene", after publication of his accounts as a patient in several lunatic asylums, A Mind That Found Itself, in 1908 and opened the first outpatient mental health clinic in the United States.
The mental hygiene movement, similar to the social hygiene movement, had at times been associated with advocating eugenics and sterilization of those considered too mentally deficient to be assisted into productive work and contented family life. In the post-WWII years, references to mental hygiene were gradually replaced by the term 'mental health' due to its positive aspect that evolves from the treatment of illness to preventive and promotive areas of healthcare.


==== Deinstitutionalization and transinstitutionalization ====
When US government-run hospitals were accused of violating human rights, advocates pushed for deinstitutionalization: the replacement of federal mental hospitals for community mental health services. The closure of state-provisioned psychiatric hospitals was enforced by the Community Mental Health Centers Act in 1963 that laid out terms in which only patients who posed an imminent danger to others or themselves could be admitted into state facilities. This was seen as an improvement from previous conditions. However, there remains a debate on the conditions of these community resources.
It has been proven that this transition was beneficial for many patients: there was an increase in overall satisfaction, a better quality of life, and more friendships between patients all at an affordable cost. This proved to be true only in the circumstance that treatment facilities had enough funding for staff and equipment as well as proper management. However, this idea is a polarizing issue. Critics of deinstitutionalization argue that poor living conditions prevailed, patients were lonely, and they did not acquire proper medical care in these treatment homes. Additionally, patients that were moved from state psychiatric care to nursing and residential homes had deficits in crucial aspects of their treatment. Some cases result in the shift of care from health workers to patients' families, where they do not have the proper funding or medical expertise to give proper care. On the other hand, patients that are treated in community mental health centers lack sufficient cancer testing, vaccinations, or otherwise regular medical check-ups.
Other critics of state deinstitutionalization argue that this was simply a transition to "transinstitutionalization", or the idea that prisons and state-provisioned hospitals are interdependent. In other words, patients become inmates. This draws on the Penrose Hypothesis of 1939, which theorized that there was an inverse relationship between prisons' population size and the number of psychiatric hospital beds. This means that populations that require psychiatric mental care will transition between institutions, which in this case, includes state psychiatric hospitals and criminal justice systems. Thus, a decrease in available psychiatric hospital beds occurred at the same time as an increase in inmates. Although some are skeptical that this is due to other external factors, others will reason this conclusion to a lack of empathy for the mentally ill. There is no argument for the social stigmatization of those with mental illnesses, they have been widely marginalized and discriminated against in society. In this source, researchers analyze how most compensation prisoners (detainees who are unable or unwilling to pay a fine for petty crimes) are unemployed, homeless, and with an extraordinarily high degree of mental illnesses and substance use disorders. Compensation prisoners then lose prospective job opportunities, face social marginalization, and lack access to resocialization programs, which ultimately facilitate reoffending. The research sheds light on how the mentally ill—and in this case, the poor—are further punished for certain circumstances that are beyond their control, and that this is a vicious cycle that repeats itself. Thus, prisons embody another state-provisioned mental hospital.
Families of patients, advocates, and mental health professionals still call for increase in more well-structured community facilities and treatment programs with a higher quality of long-term inpatient resources and care. With this more structured environment, the United States will continue with more access to mental health care and an increase in the overall treatment of the mentally ill.
However, there is still a lack of studies for mental health conditions (MHCs) to raise awareness, knowledge development, and attitudes toward seeking medical treatment for MHCs in Bangladesh. People in rural areas often seek treatment from the traditional healers and MHCs are sometimes considered a spiritual matter.


== Epidemiology ==

Mental illnesses are more common than cancer, diabetes, or heart disease. As of 2021, over 22 percent of all Americans over the age of 18 meet the criteria for having a mental illness. Evidence suggests that 970 million people worldwide have a mental disorder. Major depression ranks third among the top 10 leading causes of disease worldwide. By 2030, it is predicted to become the leading cause of disease worldwide. Over 700 thousand people commit suicide every year and around 14 million attempt it. A World Health Organization (WHO) report estimates the global cost of mental illness at nearly $2.5 trillion (two-thirds in indirect costs) in 2010, with a projected increase to over $6 trillion by 2030.
Evidence from the WHO suggests that nearly half of the world's population is affected by mental illness with an impact on their self-esteem, relationships and ability to function in everyday life. An individual's emotional health can impact their physical health. Poor mental health can lead to problems such as the inability to make adequate decisions and substance use disorders.
Good mental health can improve life quality whereas poor mental health can worsen it. According to Richards, Campania, & Muse-Burke, "There is growing evidence that is showing emotional abilities are associated with pro-social behaviors such as stress management and physical health." Their research also concluded that people who lack emotional expression are inclined to anti-social behaviors (e.g., substance use disorder and alcohol use disorder, physical fights, vandalism), which reflects one's mental health and suppressed emotions. Adults and children who face mental illness may experience social stigma, which can exacerbate the issues.


=== Global prevalence ===

Mental health can be seen as a continuum, where an individual's mental health may have many different possible values. Mental wellness is viewed as a positive attribute; this definition of mental health highlights emotional well-being, the capacity to live a full and creative life, and the flexibility to deal with life's inevitable challenges. Some discussions are formulated in terms of contentment or happiness. Many therapeutic systems and self-help books offer methods and philosophies espousing strategies and techniques vaunted as effective for further improving the mental wellness. Positive psychology is increasingly prominent in mental health.
A holistic model of mental health generally includes concepts based upon anthropological, educational, psychological, religious, and sociological perspectives. There are also models as theoretical perspectives from personality, social, clinical, health and developmental psychology.
The tripartite model of mental well-being views mental well-being as encompassing three components of emotional well-being, social well-being, and psychological well-being. Emotional well-being is defined as having high levels of positive emotions, whereas social and psychological well-being are defined as the presence of psychological and social skills and abilities that contribute to optimal functioning in daily life. The model has received empirical support across cultures. The Mental Health Continuum-Short Form (MHC-SF) is the most widely used scale to measure the tripartite model of mental well-being.


=== Demographics ===


==== Children and young adults ====

As of 2019, about one in seven of the world's 10–19 year olds experienced a mental health disorder; about 165 million young people in total. A person's teenage years are a unique period where much crucial psychological development occurs, and is also a time of increased vulnerability to the development of adverse mental health conditions. More than half of mental health conditions start before a child reaches 20 years of age, with onset occurring in adolescence much more frequently than it does in early childhood or adulthood. Many such cases go undetected and untreated.
In the United States alone, in 2021, at least roughly 17.5% of the population (ages 18 and older) were recorded as having a mental illness. The comparison between reports and statistics of mental health issues in newer generations (18–25 years old to 26–49 years old) and the older generation (50 years or older) signifies an increase in mental health issues as only 15% of the older generation reported a mental health issue whereas the newer generations reported 33.7% (18-25) and 28.1% (26-49).  The role of caregivers for youth with mental health needs is valuable, and caregivers benefit most when they have sufficient psychoeducation and peer support. Depression is one of the leading causes of illness and disability among adolescents. Suicide is the fourth leading cause of death in 15-19-year-olds. Exposure to childhood trauma can cause mental health disorders and poor academic achievement. Ignoring mental health conditions in adolescents can impact adulthood. 50% of preschool children show a natural reduction in behavioral problems. The remaining experience long-term consequences. It impairs physical and mental health and limits opportunities to live fulfilling lives. A result of depression during adolescence and adulthood may be substance abuse. The average age of onset is between 11 and 14 years for depressive disorders. Only approximately 25% of children with behavioral problems refer to medical services. The majority of children go untreated.


==== Homeless population ====

Mental illness is thought to be highly prevalent among homeless populations, though access to proper diagnoses is limited. An article written by Lisa Goodman and her colleagues summarized Smith's research into PTSD in homeless single women and mothers in St. Louis, Missouri, which found that 53% of the respondents met diagnostic criteria, and which describes homelessness as a risk factor for mental illness. At least two commonly reported symptoms of psychological trauma, social disaffiliation and learned helplessness are highly prevalent among homeless individuals and families.
While mental illness is prevalent, people infrequently receive appropriate care. Case management linked to other services is an effective care approach for improving symptoms in people experiencing homelessness. Case management reduced admission to hospitals, and it reduced substance use by those with substance abuse problems more than typical care.


==== Immigrants and refugees ====

States that produce refugees are sites of social upheaval, civil war, even genocide. Most refugees experience trauma. It can be in the form of torture, sexual assault, family fragmentation, and death of loved ones.
Refugees and immigrants experience psychosocial stressors after resettlement. These include discrimination, lack of economic stability, and social isolation causing emotional distress. For example, Not far into the 1900s, campaigns targeting Japanese immigrants were being formed that inhibited their ability to participate in U.S life, painting them as a threat to the American working-class. They were subject to prejudice and slandered by American media as well as anti-Japanese legislation being implemented. For refugees family reunification can be one of the primary needs to improve quality of life. Post-migration trauma is a cause of depressive disorders and psychological distress for immigrants.


==== Cultural and religious considerations ====
Mental health is a socially constructed concept; different societies, groups, cultures (both ethnic and national/regional), institutions, and professions have very different ways of conceptualizing its nature and causes, determining what is mentally healthy, and deciding what interventions, if any, are appropriate. Thus, different professionals will have different cultural, class, political and religious backgrounds, which will impact the methodology applied during treatment. In the context of deaf mental health care, it is necessary for professionals to have cultural competency of deaf and hard of hearing people and to understand how to properly rely on trained, qualified, and certified interpreters when working with culturally Deaf clients.
Research has shown that there is stigma attached to mental illness. Due to such stigma, individuals may resist labeling and may be driven to respond to mental health diagnoses with denialism. Family caregivers of individuals with mental disorders may also suffer discrimination or face stigma.
Addressing and eliminating the social stigma and perceived stigma attached to mental illness has been recognized as crucial to education and awareness surrounding mental health issues. In the United Kingdom, the Royal College of Psychiatrists organized the campaign Changing Minds (1998–2003) to help reduce stigma, while in the United States, efforts by entities such as the Born This Way Foundation and The Manic Monologues specifically focus on removing the stigma surrounding mental illness. The National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI) is a U.S. institution founded in 1979 to represent and advocate for those struggling with mental health issues. NAMI helps to educate about mental illnesses and health issues, while also working to eliminate stigma attached to these disorders.
Many mental health professionals are beginning to, or already understand, the importance of competency in religious diversity and spirituality, or the lack thereof. They are also partaking in cultural training to better understand which interventions work best for these different groups of people. The American Psychological Association explicitly states that religion must be respected. Education in spiritual and religious matters is also required by the American Psychiatric Association, however, far less attention is paid to the damage that more rigid, fundamentalist faiths commonly practiced in the United States can cause. This theme has been widely politicized in 2018 such as with the creation of the Religious Liberty Task Force in July of that year. Also, many providers and practitioners in the United States are only beginning to realize that the institution of mental healthcare lacks knowledge and competence of many non-Western cultures, leaving providers in the United States ill-equipped to treat patients from different cultures.


=== Occupations ===


=== Occupational therapy ===
Occupational therapy practitioners aim to improve and enable a client or group's participation in meaningful, everyday occupations. In this sense, occupation is defined as any activity that "occupies one's time". Examples of those activities include daily tasks (dressing, bathing, eating, house chores, driving, etc.), sleep and rest, education, work, play, leisure (hobbies), and social interactions. The OT profession offers a vast range of services for all stages of life in a myriad of practice settings, though the foundations of OT come from mental health. Community support for mental health through expert-moderated support groups can aid those who want to recover from mental illness or otherwise improve their emotional well-being.
OT services focused on mental health can be provided to persons, groups, and populations  across the lifespan and experiencing varying levels of mental health performance. For example, occupational therapy practitioners provide mental health services in school systems, military environments, hospitals, outpatient clinics, and inpatient mental health rehabilitation settings. Interventions or support can be provided directly through specific treatment interventions or indirectly by providing consultation to businesses, schools, or other larger groups to incorporate mental health strategies on a programmatic level. Even people who are mentally healthy can benefit from the health promotion and additional prevention strategies to reduce the impact of difficult situations.
The interventions focus on positive functioning, sensory strategies, managing emotions, interpersonal relationships, sleep, community engagement, and other cognitive skills (i.e. visual-perceptual skills, attention, memory, arousal/energy management, etc.).


==== Mental health in social work ====

Social work in mental health, also called psychiatric social work, is a process where an individual in a setting is helped to attain freedom from overlapping internal and external problems (social and economic situations, family and other relationships, the physical and organizational environment, psychiatric symptoms, etc.). It aims for harmony, quality of life, self-actualization and personal adaptation across all systems. Psychiatric social workers are mental health professionals that can assist patients and their family members in coping with both mental health issues and various economic or social problems caused by mental illness or psychiatric dysfunctions and to attain improved mental health and well-being. They are vital members of the treatment teams in Departments of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences in hospitals. They are employed in both outpatient and inpatient settings of a hospital, nursing homes, state and local governments, substance use clinics, correctional facilities, health care services, private practice, etc.
In the United States, social workers provide most of the mental health services. According to government sources, 60 percent of mental health professionals are clinically trained social workers, 10 percent are psychiatrists, 23 percent are psychologists, and 5 percent are psychiatric nurses.
Mental health social workers in Japan have professional knowledge of health and welfare and skills essential for person's well-being. Their social work training enables them as a professional to carry out Consultation assistance for mental disabilities and their social reintegration; Consultation regarding the rehabilitation of the victims; Advice and guidance for post-discharge residence and re-employment after hospitalized care, for major life events in regular life, money and self-management and other relevant matters to equip them to adapt in daily life. Social workers provide individual home visits for mentally ill and do welfare services available, with specialized training a range of procedural services are coordinated for home, workplace and school. In an administrative relationship, Psychiatric social workers provides consultation, leadership, conflict management and work direction. Psychiatric social workers who provides assessment and psychosocial interventions function as a clinician, counselor and municipal staff of the health centers.


== Risk factors and causes of mental health problems ==

There are many things that can contribute to mental health problems, including biological factors, genetic factors, life experiences (such as psychological trauma or abuse), and a family history of mental health problems.


=== Biological factors ===
According to the National Institute of Health Curriculum Supplement Series book, most scientists believe that changes in neurotransmitters can cause mental illnesses. In the section "The Biology of Mental Illnesses" the issue is explained in detail, "...there may be disruptions in the neurotransmitters dopamine, glutamate, and norepinephrine in individuals who have schizophrenia".


=== Demographic factors ===
Gender, age, ethnicity, life expectancy, longevity, population density, and community diversity are all demographic characteristics that can increase the risk and severity of mental disorders. Existing evidence demonstrates that the female gender is connected with an elevated risk of depression at different phases of life, commencing in adolescence in different contexts. Females, for example, have a higher risk of anxiety and eating disorders, whereas males have a higher chance of substance abuse and behavioral and developmental issues. This does not imply that women are less likely to suffer from developmental disorders such autism spectrum disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, Tourette syndrome, or early-onset schizophrenia. Ethnicity and ethnic heterogeneity have also been identified as risk factors for the prevalence of mental disorders, with minority groups being at a higher risk due to discrimination and exclusion.
Unemployment has been shown to hurt an individual's emotional well-being, self-esteem, and more broadly their mental health. Increasing unemployment has been shown to have a significant impact on mental health, predominantly depressive disorders. This is an important consideration when reviewing the triggers for mental health disorders in any population survey. According to a 2009 meta-analysis by Paul and Moser, countries with high income inequality and poor unemployment protections experience worse mental health outcomes among the unemployed.

Emotional mental disorders are a leading cause of disabilities worldwide. Investigating the degree and severity of untreated emotional mental disorders throughout the world is a top priority of the World Mental Health (WMH) survey initiative, which was created in 1998 by the World Health Organization (WHO). "Neuropsychiatric disorders are the leading causes of disability worldwide, accounting for 37% of all healthy life years lost through disease. These disorders are most destructive to low and middle-income countries due to their inability to provide their citizens with proper aid. Despite modern treatment and rehabilitation for emotional mental health disorders, "even economically advantaged societies have competing priorities and budgetary constraints".
Unhappily married couples suffer 3–25 times the risk of developing clinical depression.
The World Mental Health survey initiative has suggested a plan for countries to redesign their mental health care systems to best allocate resources.
"A first step is documentation of services being used and the extent and nature of unmet treatment needs. A second step could be to do a cross-national comparison of service use and unmet needs in countries with different mental health care systems. Such comparisons can help to uncover optimum financing, national policies, and delivery systems for mental health care."
Knowledge of how to provide effective emotional mental health care has become imperative worldwide. Unfortunately, most countries have insufficient data to guide decisions, absent or competing visions for resources, and near-constant pressures to cut insurance and entitlements. WMH surveys were done in Africa (Nigeria, South Africa), the Americas (Colombia, Mexico, United States), Asia and the Pacific (Japan, New Zealand, Beijing and Shanghai in the People's Republic of China), Europe (Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Spain, Ukraine), and the Middle East (Israel, Lebanon). Countries were classified with World Bank criteria as low-income (Nigeria), lower-middle-income (China, Colombia, South Africa, Ukraine), higher middle-income (Lebanon, Mexico), and high-income.
The coordinated surveys on emotional mental health disorders, their severity, and treatments were implemented in the aforementioned countries. These surveys assessed the frequency, types, and adequacy of mental health service use in 17 countries in which WMH surveys are complete. The WMH also examined unmet needs for treatment in strata defined by the seriousness of mental disorders. Their research showed that "the number of respondents using any 12-month mental health service was generally lower in developing than in developed countries, and the proportion receiving services tended to correspond to countries' percentages of gross domestic product spent on health care".
"High levels of unmet need worldwide are not surprising, since WHO Project ATLAS' findings of much lower mental health expenditures than was suggested by the magnitude of burdens from mental illnesses. Generally, unmet needs in low-income and middle-income countries might be attributable to these nations spending reduced amounts (usually <1%) of already diminished health budgets on mental health care, and they rely heavily on out-of-pocket spending by citizens who are ill-equipped for it".


=== Stress ===

The Centre for Addiction and Mental Health discusses how a certain amount of stress is a normal part of daily life. Small doses of stress help people meet deadlines, be prepared for presentations, be productive and arrive on time for important events. However, long-term stress can become harmful. When stress becomes overwhelming and prolonged, the risks for mental health problems and medical problems increase." Also on that note, some studies have found language to deteriorate mental health and even harm humans.
The impact of a stressful environment has also been highlighted by different models. Mental health has often been understood from the lens of the vulnerability-stress model. In that context, stressful situations may contribute to a preexisting vulnerability to negative mental health outcomes being realized. On the other hand, the differential susceptibility hypothesis suggests that mental health outcomes are better explained by an increased sensitivity to the environment than by vulnerability. For example, it was found that children scoring higher on observer-rated environmental sensitivity often derive more harm from low-quality parenting, but also more benefits from high-quality parenting than those children scoring lower on that measure.


=== Poverty ===


=== Environmental factors ===


== Prevention and promotion ==

"The terms mental health promotion and prevention have often been confused. Promotion is defined as intervening to optimize positive mental health by addressing determinants of positive mental health (i.e. protective factors) before a specific mental health problem has been identified, with the ultimate goal of improving the positive mental health of the population. Mental health prevention is defined as intervening to minimize mental health problems (i.e. risk factors) by addressing determinants of mental health problems before a specific mental health problem has been identified in the individual, group, or population of focus with the ultimate goal of reducing the number of future mental health problems in the population."
In order to improve mental health, the root of the issue has to be resolved. "Prevention emphasizes the avoidance of risk factors; promotion aims to enhance an individual's ability to achieve a positive sense of self-esteem, mastery, well-being, and social inclusion." Mental health promotion attempts to increase protective factors and healthy behaviors that can help prevent the onset of a diagnosable mental disorder and reduce risk factors that can lead to the development of a mental disorder. Yoga is an example of an activity that calms one's entire body and nerves. According to a study on well-being by Richards, Campania, and Muse-Burke, "mindfulness is considered to be a purposeful state, it may be that those who practice it belief in its importance and value being mindful, so that valuing of self-care activities may influence the intentional component of mindfulness." Akin to surgery, sometimes the body must be further damaged, before it can properly heal 
Mental health is conventionally defined as a hybrid of the absence of a mental disorder and the presence of well-being. Focus is increasing on preventing mental disorders.
Prevention is beginning to appear in mental health strategies, including the 2004 WHO report "Prevention of Mental Disorders", the 2008 EU "Pact for Mental Health" and the 2011 US National Prevention Strategy. Some commentators have argued that a pragmatic and practical approach to mental disorder prevention at work would be to treat it the same way as physical injury prevention.
Prevention of a disorder at a young age may significantly decrease the chances that a child will have a disorder later in life, and shall be the most efficient and effective measure from a public health perspective. Prevention may require the regular consultation of a physician for at least twice a year to detect any signs that reveal any mental health concerns.
Additionally, social media is becoming a resource for prevention. In 2004, the Mental Health Services Act began to fund marketing initiatives to educate the public on mental health. This California-based project is working to combat the negative perception with mental health and reduce the stigma associated with it. While social media can benefit mental health, it can also lead to deterioration if not managed properly. Limiting social media intake is beneficial.
Studies report that patients in mental health care who can access and read their Electronic Health Records (EHR) or Open Notes online experience increased understanding of their mental health, feeling in control of their care, and enhanced trust in their clinicians. Patients' also reported feelings of greater validation, engagement, remembering their care plan, and acquiring a better awareness of potential side effects of their medications, when reading their mental health notes. Other common experiences were that shared mental health notes enhance patient empowerment and augment patient autonomy.
Furthermore, recent studies have shown that social media is an effective way to draw attention to mental health issues. By collecting data from Twitter, researchers found that social media presence is heightened after an event relating to behavioral health occurs. Researchers continue to find effective ways to use social media to bring more awareness to mental health issues through online campaigns in other sites such as Facebook and Instagram.


=== Care navigation ===

Mental health care navigation helps to guide patients and families through the fragmented, often confusing mental health industries. Care navigators work closely with patients and families through discussion and collaboration to provide information on best therapies as well as referrals to practitioners and facilities specializing in particular forms of emotional improvement. The difference between therapy and care navigation is that the care navigation process provides information and directs patients to therapy rather than providing therapy. Still, care navigators may offer diagnosis and treatment planning. Though many care navigators are also trained therapists and doctors. Care navigation is the link between the patient and the below therapies. A clear recognition that mental health requires medical intervention was demonstrated in a study by Kessler et al. of the prevalence and treatment of mental disorders from 1990 to 2003 in the United States. Despite the prevalence of mental health disorders remaining unchanged during this period, the number of patients seeking treatment for mental disorders increased threefold.


=== Methods ===


==== Pharmacotherapy ====
Pharmacotherapy is a therapy that uses pharmaceutical drugs. Pharmacotherapy is used in the treatment of mental illness through the use of antidepressants, benzodiazepines, and the use of elements such as lithium. It can only be prescribed by a medical professional trained in the field of Psychiatry.


==== Physical activity ====
Physical exercise can improve mental and physical health. Playing sports, walking, cycling, or doing any form of physical activity trigger the production of various hormones, sometimes including endorphins, which can elevate a person's mood.
Studies have shown that in some cases, physical activity can have the same impact as antidepressants when treating depression and anxiety.
Moreover, cessation of physical exercise may have adverse effects on some mental health conditions, such as depression and anxiety. This could lead to different negative outcomes such as obesity, skewed body image and many health risks associated with mental illnesses. Exercise can improve mental health but it should not be used as an alternative to therapy.


==== Activity therapies ====
Activity therapies also called recreation therapy and occupational therapy, promote healing through active engagement. An example of occupational therapy would be promoting an activity that improves daily life, such as self-care or improving hobbies.
Each of these therapies have proven to improve mental health and have resulted in healthier, happier individuals. In recent years, for example, coloring has been recognized as an activity that has been proven to significantly lower the levels of depressive symptoms and anxiety in many studies.


==== Expressive therapies ====
Expressive therapies or creative arts therapies are a form of psychotherapy that involves the arts or artmaking. These therapies include art therapy, music therapy, drama therapy, dance therapy, and poetry therapy. It has been proven that music therapy is an effective way of helping people with a mental health disorder. Drama therapy is approved by NICE for the treatment of psychosis.


==== Psychotherapy ====

Psychotherapy is the general term for the scientific based treatment of mental health issues based on modern medicine. It includes a number of schools, such as gestalt therapy, psychoanalysis, cognitive behavioral therapy, psychedelic therapy, transpersonal psychology/psychotherapy, and dialectical behavioral therapy.
Group therapy involves any type of therapy that takes place in a setting involving multiple people. It can include psychodynamic groups, expressive therapy groups, support groups (including the Twelve-step program), problem-solving and psychoeducation groups.


==== Self-compassion ====

According to Neff, self-compassion consists of three main positive components and their negative counterparts: Self-Kindness versus Self-Judgment, Common Humanity versus Isolation and Mindfulness versus Over-Identification. Furthermore, there is evidence from a study by Shin & Lin suggesting specific components of self-compassion can predict specific dimensions of positive mental health (emotional, social, and psychological well-being).


==== Social-emotional learning ====

The Collaborative for academic, social, emotional learning (CASEL) addresses five broad and interrelated areas of competence and highlights examples for each: self-awareness, self-management, social awareness, relationship skills, and responsible decision-making. A meta-analysis was done by Alexendru Boncu, Iuliana Costeau, & Mihaela Minulescu (2017) looking at social-emotional learning (SEL) studies and the effects on emotional and behavior outcomes. They found a small but significant effect size (across the studies looked into) for externalized problems and social-emotional skills.


==== Meditation ====

The practice of mindfulness meditation has several potential mental health benefits, such as bringing about reductions in depression, anxiety and stress. Mindfulness meditation may also be effective in treating substance use disorders.


==== Lucid dreaming ====
Lucid dreaming has been found to be associated with greater mental well-being. It also was not associated with poorer sleep quality nor with cognitive dissociation. There is also some evidence lucid dreaming therapy can help with nightmare reduction.


==== Mental fitness ====
Mental fitness is a mental health movement that encourages people to intentionally regulate and maintain their emotional wellbeing through friendship, regular human contact, and activities that include meditation, calming exercises, aerobic exercise, mindfulness, having a routine and maintaining adequate sleep. Mental fitness is intended to build resilience against every-day mental and potentially physical health challenges to prevent an escalation of anxiety, depression, and suicidal ideation. This can help people, including older adults with health challenges, to more effectively cope with the escalation of those feelings if they occur.


==== Spiritual counseling ====
Spiritual counsellors meet with people in need to offer comfort and support and to help them gain a better understanding of their issues and develop a problem-solving relation with spirituality. These types of counselors deliver care based on spiritual, psychological and theological principles.


== Laws and public health policies ==

There are many factors that influence mental health including:

Mental illness, disability, and suicide are ultimately the result of a combination of biology, environment, and access to and utilization of mental health treatment.
Public health policies can influence access and utilization, which subsequently may improve mental health and help to progress the negative consequences of depression and its associated disability.


=== United States ===
Emotional mental illnesses is a particular concern in the United States since the U.S. has the highest annual prevalence rates (26 percent) for mental illnesses among a comparison of 14 developing and developed countries. While approximately 80 percent of all people in the United States with a mental disorder eventually receive some form of treatment, on average persons do not access care until nearly a decade following the development of their illness, and less than one-third of people who seek help receive minimally adequate care. The government offers everyone programs and services, but veterans receive the most help, there is certain eligibility criteria that has to be met.


==== Policies ====
Mental health policies in the United States have experienced four major reforms: the American asylum movement led by Dorothea Dix in 1843; the mental hygiene movement inspired by Clifford Beers in 1908; the deinstitutionalization started by Action for Mental Health in 1961; and the community support movement called for by The CMCH Act Amendments of 1975.
In 1843, Dorothea Dix submitted a Memorial to the Legislature of Massachusetts, describing the abusive treatment and horrible conditions received by the mentally ill patients in jails, cages, and almshouses. She revealed in her Memorial: "I proceed, gentlemen, briefly to call your attention to the present state of insane persons confined within this Commonwealth, in cages, closets, cellars, stalls, pens! Chained, naked, beaten with rods, and lashed into obedience...." Many asylums were built in that period, with high fences or walls separating the patients from other community members and strict rules regarding the entrance and exit. In 1866, a recommendation came to the New York State Legislature to establish a separate asylum for chronic mentally ill patients. Some hospitals placed the chronic patients into separate wings or wards, or different buildings.
In A Mind That Found Itself (1908) Clifford Whittingham Beers described the humiliating treatment he received and the deplorable conditions in the mental hospital. One year later, the National Committee for Mental Hygiene (NCMH) was founded by a small group of reform-minded scholars and scientists—including Beers himself—which marked the beginning of the "mental hygiene" movement. The movement emphasized the importance of childhood prevention. World War I catalyzed this idea with an additional emphasis on the impact of maladjustment, which convinced the hygienists that prevention was the only practical approach to handle mental health issues. However, prevention was not successful, especially for chronic illness; the condemnable conditions in the hospitals were even more prevalent, especially under the pressure of the increasing number of chronically ill and the influence of the depression.
In 1961, the Joint Commission on Mental Health published a report called Action for Mental Health, whose goal was for community clinic care to take on the burden of prevention and early intervention of the mental illness, therefore to leave space in the hospitals for severe and chronic patients. The court started to rule in favor of the patients' will on whether they should be forced to treatment. By 1977, 650 community mental health centers were built to cover 43 percent of the population and serve 1.9 million individuals a year, and the lengths of treatment decreased from 6 months to only 23 days. However, issues still existed. Due to inflation, especially in the 1970s, the community nursing homes received less money to support the care and treatment provided. Fewer than half of the planned centers were created, and new methods did not fully replace the old approaches to carry out its full capacity of treating power. Besides, the community helping system was not fully established to support the patients' housing, vocational opportunities, income supports, and other benefits. Many patients returned to welfare and criminal justice institutions, and more became homeless. The movement of deinstitutionalization was facing great challenges.
After realizing that simply changing the location of mental health care from the state hospitals to nursing houses was insufficient to implement the idea of deinstitutionalization, the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) in 1975 created the Community Support Program (CSP) to provide funds for communities to set up a comprehensive mental health service and supports to help the mentally ill patients integrate successfully in the society. The program stressed the importance of other supports in addition to medical care, including housing, living expenses, employment, transportation, and education; and set up new national priority for people with serious mental disorders. In addition, the Congress enacted the Mental Health Systems Act of 1980 to prioritize the service to the mentally ill and emphasize the expansion of services beyond just clinical care alone. Later in the 1980s, under the influence from the Congress and the Supreme Court, many programs started to help the patients regain their benefits. A new Medicaid service was also established to serve people who were diagnosed with a "chronic mental illness". People who were temporally hospitalized were also provided aid and care and a pre-release program was created to enable people to apply for reinstatement prior to discharge. Not until 1990, around 35 years after the start of the deinstitutionalization, did the first state hospital begin to close. The number of hospitals dropped from around 300 by over 40 in the 1990s, and finally a Report on Mental Health showed the efficacy of mental health treatment, giving a range of treatments available for patients to choose.
However, several critics maintain that deinstitutionalization has, from a mental health point of view, been a thoroughgoing failure. The seriously mentally ill are either homeless, or in prison; in either case (especially the latter), they are getting little or no mental health care. This failure is attributed to a number of reasons over which there is some degree of contention, although there is general agreement that community support programs have been ineffective at best, due to a lack of funding.
The 2011 National Prevention Strategy included mental and emotional well-being, with recommendations including better parenting and early intervention programs, which increase the likelihood of prevention programs being included in future US mental health policies. The NIMH is researching only suicide and HIV/AIDS prevention, but the National Prevention Strategy could lead to it focusing more broadly on longitudinal prevention studies.
In 2013, United States Representative Tim Murphy introduced the Helping Families in Mental Health Crisis Act, HR2646. The bipartisan bill went through substantial revision and was reintroduced in 2015 by Murphy and Congresswoman Eddie Bernice Johnson. In November 2015, it passed the Health Subcommittee by an 18–12 vote.


== See also ==

988 (telephone number)
Abnormal psychology
Emotional resilience
Ethnopsychopharmacology
Mental environment
Mental health day
Mental health during the COVID-19 pandemic
Mental health first aid
Mental health in education
Mental health in the workplace
Mental health of Asian Americans
Self-help groups for mental health
Social determinants of mental health
Social stigma
Suicide awareness
Telemental health
World Mental Health Day
Well-being


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Online Books by William Sweetser


== External links ==

 Quotations related to Mental health at Wikiquote
 Media related to Mental health at Wikimedia Commons
Mental Health by WHO
The Public Health Agency of Canada
"Mental health and substance abuse". WHO Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean.
National Institute of Mental Health (United States)
Health-EU Portal Mental Health in the EU
Mental Health Department of Health (United Kingdom)

Document similaire: Mental health in the United States (Similarité: 0.7487)
In the United States, healthcare is largely provided by private sector healthcare facilities, and paid for by a combination of public programs, private insurance, and out-of-pocket payments. The U.S. is the only developed country without a system of universal healthcare, and a significant proportion of its population lacks health insurance. The United States spends more on healthcare than any other country, both in absolute terms and as a percentage of GDP; however, this expenditure does not necessarily translate into better overall health outcomes compared to other developed nations. Coverage varies widely across the population, with certain groups, such as the elderly and low-income individuals, receiving more comprehensive care through government programs such as Medicaid and Medicare.
The U.S. healthcare system has been the subject of significant political debate and reform efforts, particularly in the areas of healthcare costs, insurance coverage, and the quality of care. Legislation such as the Affordable Care Act of 2010 has sought to address some of these issues, though challenges remain. Uninsured rates have fluctuated over time, and disparities in access to care exist based on factors such as income, race, and geographical location. The private insurance model predominates, and employer-sponsored insurance is a common way for individuals to obtain coverage.
The complex nature of the system, as well as its high costs, has led to ongoing discussions about the future of healthcare in the United States. At the same time, the United States is a global leader in medical innovation, measured either in terms of revenue or the number of new drugs and medical devices introduced. The Foundation for Research on Equal Opportunity concluded that the United States dominates science and technology, which "was on full display during the COVID-19 pandemic, as the U.S. government [delivered] coronavirus vaccines far faster than anyone had ever done before", but lags behind in fiscal sustainability, with "[government] spending ... growing at an unsustainable rate".
In the early 20th century, advances in medical technology and a focus on public health contributed to a shift in healthcare. The American Medical Association (AMA) worked to standardize medical education, and the introduction of employer-sponsored insurance plans marked the beginning of the modern health insurance system. More people were starting to get involved in healthcare like state actors, other professionals/practitioners, patients and clients, the judiciary, and business interests and employers. They had interest in medical regulations of professionals to ensure that services were provided by trained and educated people to minimize harm. The post–World War II era saw a significant expansion in healthcare where more opportunities were offered to increase accessibility of services. The passage of the Hill–Burton Act in 1946 provided federal funding for hospital construction, and Medicare and Medicaid were established in 1965 to provide healthcare coverage to the elderly and low-income populations, respectively.


== History ==

The healthcare system in the United States can be traced back to the Colonial Era. Community-oriented care was typical, with families and neighbors providing assistance to the sick. During the 19th century, the practice of medicine began to professionalize, following the “Anglo-American model” where these new medical professionals were empowered by the state to govern their own affairs, leading to various collaborations to acquire status and win legislation granting them the power to self-regulate. The establishment of medical schools and professional organizations led to standardized training and certification processes for doctors. Despite this progress, healthcare services remained disparate, particularly between urban and rural areas. The concept of hospitals as institutions for the sick began to take root, leading to the foundation of many public and private hospitals.

The latter part of the 20th century saw continued evolution in healthcare policy, technology, and delivery. Following the Stabilization Act of 1942, employers, unable to provide higher salaries to attract or retain employees, began to offer insurance plans, including healthcare packages, as a benefit in kind, thereby beginning the practice of employer-sponsored health insurance, a practice that is cemented into the work culture of today. The Health Maintenance Organization Act of 1973 encouraged the development of managed care, while advances in medical technology revolutionized treatment. In the 21st century, the Affordable Care Act (ACA) was passed in 2010, extending healthcare coverage to millions of uninsured Americans and implementing reforms aimed at improving quality and reducing costs.


== Statistics ==


=== Hospitalizations ===

According to a statistical brief by the Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project (HCUP), there were 35.7 million hospitalizations in 2016, a significant decrease from the 38.6 million in 2011. For every 1,000 in the population, there was an average of 104.2 stays and each stay averaged $11,700 (equivalent to $14,854 in 2023), an increase from the $10,400 (equivalent to $13,802 in 2023) cost per stay in 2012. Approximately 7.6% of the population had overnight stays in 2017, each stay lasting an average of 4.6 days.
A study by the National Institutes of Health reported that the lifetime per capita expenditure at birth, using the year 2000 dollars, showed a large difference between the healthcare costs of females ($361,192, equivalent to $639,048 in 2023) and males ($268,679, equivalent to $475,367 in 2023). A large portion of this cost difference is in the shorter lifespan of men, but, even after adjustment for age (assuming men live as long as women), there still is a 20% difference in lifetime healthcare expenditures.


=== Health insurance and accessibility ===

Unlike most developed nations, the US health system does not provide healthcare to the country's entire population. In 1977, the United States was said to be the only industrialized country not to have some form of national health insurance or direct healthcare provision to citizens through a nationalized healthcare system. A 1978 study argued that “Today every government in the world-including Red China with its squadrons of semi-trained “barefoot doctors”-realizes it has a responsibility to keep its citizens in good physical and mental health. Unlike the U.S., nations like Scandinavia, the U.K., Ireland, Japan and others have opted for a universal health care system in which the state pays everyone's medical bills.” Instead, most citizens are covered by a combination of private insurance and various federal and state programs. As of 2017, health insurance was most commonly acquired through a group plan tied to an employer, covering 150 million people. Other major sources include Medicaid, covering 70 million, Medicare, 50 million, and health insurance marketplaces created by the ACA covering around 17 million. In 2017, a study found that 73% of plans on ACA marketplaces had narrow networks, limiting access and choice in providers.
Healthcare coverage is provided through a combination of private health insurance and public health coverage (e.g., Medicare, Medicaid). In 2013, 64% of health spending was paid for by the government, and funded via programs such as Medicare, Medicaid, the Children's Health Insurance Program, Tricare, and the Veterans Health Administration. People aged under 65 acquire insurance via their or a family member's employer, by purchasing health insurance on their own, getting government and/or other assistance based on income or another condition, or are uninsured. Health insurance for public sector employees is primarily provided by the government in its role as employer. Managed care, where payers use various techniques intended to improve quality and limit cost, has become ubiquitous.

Measures of accessibility and affordability tracked by national health surveys include: percent of population with insurance, having a usual source of medical care, visiting the dentist yearly, rates of preventable hospitalizations, reported difficulty seeing a specialist, delaying care due to cost, and rates of health insurance coverage. In 2004, an OECD report noted that "all OECD countries [except Mexico, Turkey, and the US] had achieved universal or near-universal (at least 98.4% insured) coverage of their populations by 1990". The 2004 IOM report also observed that "lack of health insurance causes roughly 18,000 unnecessary deaths every year in the US". A 2009 study done at Harvard Medical School with Cambridge Health Alliance by cofounders of Physicians for a National Health Program, a pro-single payer lobbying group, showed that nearly 45,000 annual deaths are associated with a lack of patient health insurance. The study also found that uninsured, working Americans have an approximately 40% higher mortality risk compared to privately insured working Americans.
The Gallup organization tracks the percent of adult Americans who are uninsured for healthcare, beginning in 2008. The rate of uninsured peaked at 18.0% in 2013 prior to the ACA mandate, fell to 10.9% in the third quarter of 2016, and stood at 13.7% in the fourth quarter of 2018. "The 2.8-percentage-point increase since that low represents a net increase of about seven million adults without health insurance."
The US Census Bureau reported that 28.5 million people (8.8%) did not have health insurance in 2017, down from 49.9 million (16.3%) in 2010. Between 2004 and 2013, a trend of high rates of underinsurance and wage stagnation contributed to a healthcare consumption decline for low-income Americans. This trend was reversed after the implementation of the major provisions of the ACA in 2014.

As of 2017, the possibility that the ACA may be repealed or replaced has intensified interest in the questions of whether and how health insurance coverage affects health and mortality. An estimated 13 million people gained coverage through Medicaid expansion, and 76 million people gained eligibility for free preventative services. Several studies have indicated that there is an association with expansion of the ACA and factors associated with better health outcomes such as having a regular source of care and the ability to afford care. A 2016 study concluded that an approximately 60% increased ability to afford care can be attributed to Medicaid expansion provisions enacted by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. Additionally, an analysis of changes in mortality post Medicaid expansion suggests that Medicaid saves lives at a relatively more cost effective rate of a societal cost of $327,000 to $867,000 (equivalent to $415,143 to $1.1 million in 2023) per life saved compared to other public policies which cost an average of $7.6 million (equivalent to $9.65 million in 2023) per life.
A 2009 study in five states found that medical debt contributed to 46.2% of all personal bankruptcies, and 62.1% of bankruptcy filers claimed high medical expenses in 2007. Since then, health costs and the numbers of uninsured and underinsured have increased. A 2013 study found that about 25% of all senior citizens declare bankruptcy due to medical expenses.
In practice, the uninsured are often treated, but the cost is covered through taxes and other fees which shift the cost. Forgone medical care due to extensive cost sharing may ultimately increase costs due to downstream medical issues; this dynamic may play a part in US's international ranking as having the highest healthcare expenditures despite significant patient cost-sharing.
Those who are insured may be underinsured such that they cannot afford adequate medical care. A 2003 study estimated that 16 million US adults were underinsured, disproportionately affecting those with lower incomes—73% of the underinsured in the study population had annual incomes below 200% of the federal poverty level. Lack of insurance or higher cost sharing (user fees for the patient with insurance) create barriers to accessing healthcare: use of care declines with increasing patient cost-sharing obligation. Before the ACA passed in 2014, 39% of below-average income Americans reported forgoing seeing a doctor for a medical issue (whereas 7% of low-income Canadians and 1% of low-income British citizens reported the same).


=== Health in the US in global context ===

The US life expectancy in 2010 was 78.6 years at birth, up from 75.2 years in 1990; this ranks 42nd among 224 nations, and 22nd out of the 35 OECD countries, down from 20th in 1990. In 2021, US life expectancy fell to 76.4 years, the shortest in roughly two decades. Drivers for this drop in life expectancy include accidents, drug overdoses, heart and liver disease, suicides and the COVID-19 pandemic.
In 2019, the under-five child mortality rate was 6.5 deaths per 1000 live births, placing the US 33rd of 37 OECD countries.
While not as high in 2015 (14) as in 2013 (18.5), maternal deaths related to childbirth have shown recent increases; in 1987, the mortality ratio was 7.2 per 100,000. As of 2015, the US rate is double the maternal mortality rate in Belgium or Canada, and more than triple the rate in Finland as well as several other Western European countries. In 2019, Black maternal health advocate and Parents writer Christine Michel Carter interviewed Vice President Kamala Harris. As a senator, in 2019 Harris reintroduced the Maternal Care Access and Reducing Emergencies (CARE) Act which aimed to address the maternal mortality disparity faced by women of color by training providers on recognizing implicit racial bias and its impact on care. Harris stated:

We need to speak the uncomfortable truth that women—and especially Black women—are too often not listened to or taken seriously by the health care system, and therefore they are denied the dignity that they deserve. And we need to speak this truth because today, the United States is 1 of only 13 countries in the world where the rate of maternal mortality is worse than it was 25 years ago. That risk is even higher for Black women, who are three to four times more likely than white women to die from pregnancy-related causes. These numbers are simply outrageous.

Life expectancy at birth for a child born in the US in 2015 is 81.2 (females) or 76.3 (males) years. According to the WHO, life expectancy in the US is 31st in the world (out of 183 countries) as of 2015. The US's average life expectancy (both sexes) is just over 79. Japan ranks first with an average life expectancy of nearly 84 years. The US ranks lower (36th) when considering health-adjusted life expectancy (HALE) at just over 69 years. Another source, the Central Intelligence Agency, indicates life expectancy at birth in the US is 79.8, ranking it 42nd in the world. Monaco is first on this list of 224, with an average life expectancy of 89.5.
A 2013 National Research Council study stated that, when considered as one of 17 high-income countries, the US was at or near the top in infant mortality, heart and lung disease, sexually transmitted infections, adolescent pregnancies, injuries, homicides, and rates of disability. Together, such issues place the US at the bottom of the list for life expectancy in high-income countries. Females born in the US in 2015 have a life expectancy of 81.6 years, and males 76.9 years; more than three years less and as much as over five years less than people born in Switzerland (85.3 F, 81.3 M) or Japan (86.8 F, 80.5 M) in 2015.


=== Causes of mortality in the US ===

The top three causes of death among both sexes and all ages in the US have consistently remained cardiovascular diseases (ranked 1st), neoplasms (2nd) and neurological disorders (3rd), since the 1990s. In 2015, the total number of deaths by heart disease was 633,842, by cancer it was 595,930, and from chronic lower respiratory disease it was 155,041. In 2015, 267.18 deaths per 100,000 people were caused by cardiovascular diseases, 204.63 by neoplasms and 100.66 by neurological disorders. Diarrhea, lower respiratory, and other common infections were ranked sixth overall, but had the highest rate of infectious disease mortality in the US at 31.65 deaths per 100,000 people. There is evidence, however, that a large proportion of health outcomes and early mortality can be attributed to factors other than communicable or non-communicable disease. As a 2013 National Research Council study concluded, more than half the men who die before the age of 50 die due to murder (19%), traffic accidents (18%), and other accidents (16%). For women, the percentages are different: 53% of women who die before the age of 50 die due to disease, whereas 38% die due to accidents, homicide, and suicide. Diseases of despair (drug overdoses, alcoholic liver disease, and suicide), which started increasing in the early 1990s, kill roughly 158,000 Americans a year as of 2018. Suicides reached record levels in the United States in 2022, with nearly 49,500 suicide deaths. Since 2011, around 540,000 people in the U.S. have died by suicide. Cumulative poverty of ten years or more is the fourth leading risk factor for mortality in the United States annually.

Since 2020, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reports that the life expectancy for the US population was 77.0 years, a decrease of 1.8 years from 2019. Life expectancy fell again in 2021 to 76.4 years, which has been attributed to COVID-19 and rising death rates from suicide, drug overdoses and liver disease. As of 2023, U.S. life expectancy has increased slightly following the COVID-19 pandemic, but still trails behind peer and rival countries including Canada, China and Germany. Death certificate data from the CDC reveals that mortality rates among children and adolescents increased by 11% for the years 2019 and 2020 and a further 8% for 2020 and 2021, with injuries being a driving factor, along with homicide, suicide, drug overdoses and motor vehicle accidents impacting those aged 10 to 19. In 2024 a study reported obesity-related deaths have surged in the United States in recent years, particularly among men, according to new data published in The American Journal of Cardiology.  The study noted that while the age-adjusted mortality rate has increased due to obesity, deaths related to cardiovascular disease, including ischemic heart disease and heart failure, have actually decreased.


== Providers ==
Healthcare providers in the US encompass individual healthcare personnel, healthcare facilities, and medical products.


=== Facilities ===

In the US, ownership of the healthcare system is now mainly in private hands, though federal, state, county, and city governments also own certain facilities.
As of 2018, there were 5,534 registered hospitals in the US. There were 4,840 community hospitals, which are defined as nonfederal, short-term general, or specialty hospitals. The nonprofit hospitals share of total hospital capacity has remained relatively stable (about 70%) for decades. There are also privately owned for-profit hospitals as well as government hospitals in some locations, mainly owned by county and city governments. The Hill–Burton Act was passed in 1946, which provided federal funding for hospitals in exchange for treating poor patients. The largest hospital system in 2016 by revenue was HCA Healthcare; in 2019, Dignity Health and Catholic Health Initiatives merged into CommonSpirit Health to create the largest by revenue, spanning 21 states.
Integrated delivery systems, where the provider and the insurer share the risk in an attempt to provide value-based healthcare, have grown in popularity. Regional areas have separate healthcare markets, and in some markets competition is limited as the demand from the local population cannot support multiple hospitals.
About two-thirds of doctors practice in small offices with less than seven physicians, with over 80% owned by physicians; these sometimes join groups such as independent practice associations to increase bargaining power.

There is no nationwide system of government-owned medical facilities open to the general public but there are local government-owned medical facilities open to the general public. The US Department of Defense operates field hospitals as well as permanent hospitals via the Military Health System to provide military-funded care to active military personnel.
The federal Veterans Health Administration operates VA hospitals open only to veterans, though veterans who seek medical care for conditions they did not receive while serving in the military are charged for services. The Indian Health Service (IHS) operates facilities open only to Native Americans from recognized tribes. These facilities, plus tribal facilities and privately contracted services funded by IHS to increase system capacity and capabilities, provide medical care to tribespeople beyond what can be paid for by any private insurance or other government programs.

Hospitals provide some outpatient care in their emergency rooms and specialty clinics, but primarily exist to provide inpatient care. Hospital emergency departments and urgent care centers are sources of sporadic problem-focused care. Surgicenters are examples of specialty clinics. Hospice services for the terminally ill who are expected to live six months or less are most commonly subsidized by charities and government. Prenatal, family planning, and dysplasia clinics are government-funded obstetric and gynecologic specialty clinics respectively, and are usually staffed by nurse practitioners. Because of the robust skills credited to nurse practitioners (NPs) they are able to address disparities in the U.S. Healthcare System. Government-funded healthcare facilities especially have a large reliance on these NPs due to the amount of services they are required to provide. Services, particularly urgent-care services, may also be delivered remotely via telemedicine by providers such as Teladoc.
Besides government and private healthcare facilities, there are also 355 registered free clinics in the US that provide limited medical services. They are considered to be part of the social safety net for those who lack health insurance. Their services may range from more acute care (i.e., STIs, injuries, respiratory diseases) to long term care (i.e. dentistry, counseling). Another component of the healthcare safety net would be federally funded community health centers.
Other healthcare facilities include long-term housing facilities which, as of 2019, there were 15,600 nursing homes across the US, with a large portion of that number being for-profit (69.3%)
In 2022, 19 hospitals filed for bankruptcy, closed, or announced plans to close.


=== Physicians (M.D. and D.O.) ===

Physicians in the US include those trained by the US medical education system, and those that are international medical graduates who have progressed through the necessary steps to acquire a medical license to practice in a state. This includes going through the three steps of the US Medical Licensing Examination (USMLE). The first step of the USMLE tests whether medical students both understand and are capable of applying the basic scientific foundations to medicine after the second year of medical school. The topics include: anatomy, biochemistry, microbiology, pathology, pharmacology, physiology, behavioral sciences, nutrition, genetics, and aging. The second step is designed to test whether medical students can apply their medical skills and knowledge to actual clinical practice during students' fourth year of medical school. The third step is done after the first year of residency. It tests whether students can apply medical knowledge to the unsupervised practice of medicine.
The American College of Physicians, uses the term "physician" to describe all medical practitioners holding a professional medical degree. In the US, the vast majority of physicians have a Doctor of Medicine (M.D.) degree. Those with Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine (D.O.) degrees get similar training and go through the same MLE steps as MD's and so are also allowed to use the title "physician".


=== Medical products, research, and development ===
As in most other countries, the manufacture and production of pharmaceuticals and medical devices is carried out by private companies. The research and development of medical devices and pharmaceuticals is supported by both public and private sources of funding. In 2003, research and development expenditures were approximately $95 billion (equivalent to $151 billion in 2023) with $40 billion (equivalent to $63.5 billion in 2023) coming from public sources and $55 billion (equivalent to $87.3 billion in 2023) coming from private sources. These investments into medical research have made the US the leader in medical innovation, measured either in terms of revenue or the number of new drugs and devices introduced. In 2016, the research and development spending by pharmaceutical companies in the US was estimated to be around $59 billion (equivalent to $73.5 billion in 2023). In 2006, the US accounted for three quarters of the world's biotechnology revenues and 82% of world R&D spending in biotechnology. According to multiple international pharmaceutical trade groups, the high cost of patented drugs in the US has encouraged substantial reinvestment in such research and development. Though, the ACA will force industry to sell medicine at a cheaper price. Due to this, it is possible budget cuts will be made on research and development of human health and medicine in the US.
In 2022, the United States had 10,265 drugs in the works, more than twice as many as China and the European Union, and four times as many as the United Kingdom.


=== Healthcare provider employment in the US ===
A major impending demographic shift in the US will require the healthcare system to provide more care, as the older population is predicted to increase medical expenses by 5% or more in North America due to the "baby boomers" reaching retirement age. The overall spending on healthcare has increased since the late 1990s, and not just due to general price raises as the rate of spending is growing faster than the rate of inflation. Moreover, the expenditure on health services for people over 45 years old is 8.3 times the maximum of that of those under 45 years old.


=== Alternative medicine ===
Other methods of medical treatment are being practiced more frequently than before. This field is labeled Complementary and Alternative Medicine (CAM) and are defined as therapies generally not taught in medical school nor available in hospitals. They include herbs, massages, energy healing, homeopathy, faith healing, and, more recently popularized, cryotherapy, cupping, and Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation or TMS. Providers of these CAM treatments are sometimes legally considered healthcare providers in the US. Common reasons for seeking these alternative approaches included improving their well-being, engaging in a transformational experience, gaining more control over their own health, or finding a better way to relieve symptoms caused by chronic disease. They aim to treat not just physical illness but fix its underlying nutritional, social, emotional, and spiritual causes. In a 2008 survey, it was found that 37% of hospitals in the US offer at least one form of CAM treatment, the main reason being patient demand (84% of hospitals). Costs for CAM treatments average $33.9 (equivalent to $49.81 in 2023) with two-thirds being out-of-pocket, according to a 2007 statistical analysis. Moreover, CAM treatments covered 11.2% of total out-of-pocket payments on healthcare. During 2002 to 2008, spending on CAM was on the rise, but usage has since plateaued to about 40% of adults in the US


== Spending ==

The US spends more as a percentage of GDP than similar countries, and this can be explained either through higher prices for services themselves, higher costs to administer the system, or more utilization of these services, or to a combination of these elements. Healthcare costs rising far faster than inflation have been a major driver for healthcare reform in the US. As of 2016, the US spent $3.3 trillion (equivalent to $4.11 trillion in 2023; 17.9% of GDP), or $10,438 (equivalent to $13,252 in 2023) per person; major categories included 32% on hospital care, 20% on physician and clinical services, and 10% on prescription drugs. In comparison, the United Kingdom spent $3,749 (equivalent to $4,760 in 2023) per person.
In 2018, an analysis concluded that prices and administrative costs were largely the cause of the high costs, including prices for labor, pharmaceuticals, and diagnostics. The combination of high prices and high volume can cause particular expense; in the US, high-margin high-volume procedures include angioplasties, C-sections, knee replacements, and CT and MRI scans; CT and MRI scans also showed higher utilization in the US.
Aggregate US hospital costs were $387.3 billion in 2011—a 63% increase since 1997 (inflation adjusted). Costs per stay increased 47% since 1997, averaging $10,000 in 2011 (equivalent to $13,544 in 2023). As of 2008, public spending accounts for between 45% and 56% of US healthcare spending. Surgical, injury, and maternal and neonatal health hospital visit costs increased by more than 2% each year from 2003–2011. Further, while average hospital discharges remained stable, hospital costs rose from $9,100 in 2003 (equivalent to $15,072 in 2023) to $10,600 in 2011 (equivalent to $14,357 in 2023) and were projected to be $11,000 by 2013 (equivalent to $14,388 in 2023).
According to the WHO, total healthcare spending in the US was 18% of its GDP in 2011, the highest in the world. The Health and Human Services Department expects that the health share of GDP will continue its historical upward trend, reaching 19% of GDP by 2017. Of each dollar spent on healthcare in the US, 31% goes to hospital care, 21% goes to physician/clinical services, 10% to pharmaceuticals, 4% to dental, 6% to nursing homes and 3% to home healthcare, 3% for other retail products, 3% for government public health activities, 7% to administrative costs, 7% to investment, and 6% to other professional services (physical therapists, optometrists, etc.).
In 2017, a study estimated that nearly half of hospital-associated care resulted from emergency department visits. As of 2017, data from 2009–2011 showed that end-of-life care in the last year of life accounted for about 8.5%, and the last three years of life about 16.7%.
As of 2013, administration of healthcare constituted 30% of US healthcare costs.
Free-market advocates claim that the healthcare system is "dysfunctional" because the system of third-party payments from insurers removes the patient as a major participant in the financial and medical choices that affect costs. The Cato Institute claims that because government intervention has expanded insurance availability through programs such as Medicare and Medicaid, this has exacerbated the problem. According to a study paid for by America's Health Insurance Plans (a Washington lobbyist for the health insurance industry) and carried out by PriceWaterhouseCoopers, increased utilization is the primary driver of rising healthcare costs in the US The study cites numerous causes of increased utilization, including rising consumer demand, new treatments, more intensive diagnostic testing, lifestyle factors, the movement to broader-access plans, and higher-priced technologies. The study also mentions cost-shifting from government programs to private payers. Low reimbursement rates for Medicare and Medicaid have increased cost-shifting pressures on hospitals and doctors, who charge higher rates for the same services to private payers, which eventually affects health insurance rates.
In March 2010, Massachusetts released a report on the cost drivers which it called "unique in the nation". The report noted that providers and insurers negotiate privately, and therefore the prices can vary between providers and insurers for the same services, and it found that the variation in prices did not vary based on quality of care but rather on market leverage; the report also found that price increases rather than increased utilization explained the spending increases in the past several years.
Economists Eric Helland and Alex Tabarrok speculate that the increase in costs of healthcare in the US are largely a result of the Baumol effect. Since healthcare is relatively labor intensive, and productivity in the service sector has lagged that in the goods-producing sector, the costs of those services will rise relative to goods.
An analysis by the  U.S. Congressional Budget Office (CBO) suggests allowing Medicare to cover weight loss drugs would raise federal spending by approximately $35 billion between 2026 and 2034. Federal costs would rise from $1.6 billion in 2026 to $7.1 billion by 2034. However, the CBO projected that savings from improved health outcomes would be modest compared to the direct costs of the medications, totaling less than $50 million in 2026 and growing to $1 billion by 2034. Expanding coverage for weight loss drugs from Eli Lilly and Novo Nordisk would make an additional 12.5 million people eligible by 2026. Currently, around 52 million older or disabled Americans receive prescription drug coverage through Medicare, which does not include drugs specifically for weight loss.


== Regulation and oversight ==


=== Involved organizations and institutions ===
Healthcare is subject to extensive regulation at both the federal and the state level, much of which "arose haphazardly". Under this system, the federal government cedes primary responsibility to the states under the McCarran–Ferguson Act. Essential regulation includes the licensure of healthcare providers at the state level and the testing and approval of pharmaceuticals and medical devices by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and laboratory testing. These regulations are designed to protect consumers from ineffective or fraudulent healthcare. Additionally, states regulate the health insurance market and they often have laws which require that health insurance companies cover certain procedures, although state mandates generally do not apply to the self-funded healthcare plans offered by large employers, which exempt from state laws under preemption clause of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act.
In 2010, the ACA was signed by President Barack Obama and includes various new regulations, with one of the most notable being a health insurance mandate which requires all citizens to purchase health insurance. While not regulation per se, the federal government also has a major influence on the healthcare market through its payments to providers under Medicare and Medicaid, which in some cases are used as a reference point in the negotiations between medical providers and insurance companies.
At the federal level, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) oversees various federal agencies involved in healthcare, except for the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), which has final authority over the FDA in matters related to controlled substance regulations. The health agencies under the HHS umbrella are part of the U.S. Public Health Service. These include the FDA, responsible for certifying the safety of food and the effectiveness of drugs and medical products; the CDC, tasked with preventing disease, premature death, and disability; the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, which improves the quality, safety, efficiency, and effectiveness of healthcare; the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, which manages hazardous substance spills; and the National Institutes of Health, which conducts groundbreaking medical research.
State governments maintain their own health departments, and local governments (counties and municipalities) often have health departments that are branches of the state health department. State boards may have executive and police authority to enforce state health laws, with all members required to be healthcare professionals in some states. These board members may be appointed by the governor or elected by the state committee, while local board members may be elected by the mayor's council. The McCarran–Ferguson Act, which delegates regulation to the states, does not directly regulate insurance or mandate state regulation of insurance. Federal laws that do not explicitly regulate the "business of insurance" do not preempt state insurance laws or regulations. The act also stipulates that federal antitrust laws will not apply to the "business of insurance" as long as the state regulates it, though they will apply in cases of boycott, coercion, and intimidation. Conversely, most other federal laws will not apply to insurance regardless of state regulation.
Self-policing by healthcare providers plays a significant role in oversight. Many healthcare organizations voluntarily submit to inspection and certification by the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO). Providers also undergo rigorous testing to obtain board certification, attesting to their expertise. A report issued by Public Citizen in April 2008 found that, for the third consecutive year, the number of serious disciplinary actions against physicians by state medical boards declined from 2006 to 2007, prompting calls for increased oversight of these boards.
Additionally, the concept of final expense insurance is essential within the healthcare context. This type of insurance helps cover the costs associated with end-of-life expenses, providing financial peace of mind to individuals and their families. Final expense insurance ensures that healthcare-related costs, such as medical bills and funeral expenses, do not become a burden during an already challenging time.
The federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) publishes an online searchable database of performance data on nursing homes.
In 2004, libertarian think tank Cato Institute published a study which concluded that regulation provides benefits in the amount of $170 billion but costs the public up to $340 billion. The study concluded that the majority of the cost differential arises from medical malpractice, FDA regulations, and facilities regulations.


=== "Certificates of need" for hospitals ===
In 1978, the federal government required that all states implement Certificate of Need (CON) programs for cardiac care, meaning that hospitals had to apply and receive certificates prior to implementing the program; the intent was to reduce cost by reducing duplicate investments in facilities. It has been observed that these certificates could be used to increase costs through weakened competition. Many states removed the CON programs after the federal requirement expired in 1986, but some states still have these programs. Empirical research looking at the costs in areas where these programs have been discontinued have not found a clear effect on costs, and the CON programs could decrease costs because of reduced facility construction or increase costs due to reduced competition.


=== Licensing of providers ===
The American Medical Association (AMA) has lobbied the government to highly limit physician education since 1910, currently at 100,000 doctors per year, which has led to a shortage of doctors.
An even bigger problem may be that the doctors are paid for procedures instead of results.
The AMA has also aggressively lobbied for many restrictions that require doctors to carry out operations that might be carried out by cheaper workforce. For example, in 1995, 36 states banned or restricted midwifery even though it delivers equally safe care to that by doctors. The regulation lobbied by the AMA has decreased the amount and quality of healthcare, according to the consensus of economists: the restrictions do not add to quality, they decrease the supply of care. Moreover, psychologists, nurses and pharmacists are not allowed to prescribe medicines. Previously nurses were not even allowed to vaccinate the patients without direct supervision by doctors.
Thirty-six states require that healthcare workers undergo criminal background checks.


==== Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act (EMTALA) ====

EMTALA, enacted by the federal government in 1986, requires that hospital emergency departments treat emergency conditions of all patients regardless of their ability to pay and is considered a critical element in the "safety net" for the uninsured, but established no direct payment mechanism for such care. Indirect payments and reimbursements through federal and state government programs have never fully compensated public and private hospitals for the full cost of care mandated by EMTALA. More than half of all emergency care in the US now goes uncompensated. According to some analyses, EMTALA is an unfunded mandate that has contributed to financial pressures on hospitals in the last 20 years, causing them to consolidate and close facilities, and contributing to emergency room overcrowding. According to the Institute of Medicine, between 1993 and 2003, emergency room visits in the US grew by 26%, while in the same period, the number of emergency departments declined by 425.
Mentally ill patients present a unique challenge for emergency departments and hospitals. In accordance with EMTALA, mentally ill patients who enter emergency rooms are evaluated for emergency medical conditions. Once mentally ill patients are medically stable, regional mental health agencies are contacted to evaluate them. Patients are evaluated as to whether they are a danger to themselves or others. Those meeting this criterion are admitted to a mental health facility to be further evaluated by a psychiatrist. Typically, mentally ill patients can be held for up to 72 hours, after which a court order is required.


=== Quality assurance ===

Healthcare quality assurance consists of the "activities and programs intended to assure or improve the quality of care in either a defined medical setting or a program. The concept includes the assessment or evaluation of the quality of care; identification of problems or shortcomings in the delivery of care; designing activities to overcome these deficiencies; and follow-up monitoring to ensure effectiveness of corrective steps." Private companies such as Grand Rounds also release quality information and offer services to employers and plans to map quality within their networks.
One innovation in encouraging quality of healthcare is the public reporting of the performance of hospitals, health professionals or providers, and healthcare organizations. However, there is "no consistent evidence that the public release of performance data changes consumer behaviour or improves care".


== Overall system effectiveness ==
A 2019 issue brief by the Commonwealth Fund concluded that "people in the United States experience the worst health outcomes overall of any high-income nation" and that "Americans are more likely to die younger, and from avoidable causes, than residents of peer countries." A subsequent analysis in 2022 showed a worsening of these trends, though it acknowledged that the tumultuous impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and lockdowns on healthcare in the United States was challenging to disentangle from the longer term trajectory of the system.


=== Measures of effectiveness ===
The US healthcare delivery system unevenly provides medical care of varying quality to its population. In a highly effective healthcare system, individuals would receive reliable care that meets their needs and is based on the best scientific knowledge available. In order to monitor and evaluate system effectiveness, researchers and policy makers track system measures and trends over time. The HHS populates a publicly available dashboard called the Health System Measurement Project, to ensure a robust monitoring system. The dashboard captures the access, quality and cost of care; overall population health; and health system dynamics (e.g., workforce, innovation, health information technology). Included measures align with other system performance measuring activities including the HHS Strategic Plan, the Government Performance and Results Act, Healthy People 2020, and the National Strategies for Quality and Prevention.


==== Waiting times ====
Waiting times in US healthcare are usually short, but are not usually 0 for non-urgent care at least. Also, a minority of US patients wait longer than is perceived. In a 2010 Commonwealth Fund survey, most Americans self-reported waiting less than four weeks for their most recent specialist appointment and less than one month for elective surgery. However, about 30% of patients reported waiting longer than one month for elective surgery, and about 20% longer than four weeks for their most recent specialist appointment. These percentages were smaller than in France, the UK, New Zealand, and Canada, but not better than Germany and Switzerland (although waits shorter than four weeks/one month may not be equally long across these three countries). The number of respondents may not be enough to be fully representative. In a study in 1994 comparing Ontario to three regions of the US, self-reported mean wait times to see an orthopedic surgeon were two weeks in those parts of the US, and four weeks in Canada. Mean waits for the knee or hip surgery were self-reported as three weeks in those parts of the US and eight weeks in Ontario.
However, current waits in both countries' regions may have changed since then (certainly in Canada waiting times went up later). More recently, at one Michigan hospital, the waiting time for the elective surgical operation open carpel tunnel release was an average of 27 days, most ranging from 17 to 37 days (an average of almost four weeks, ranging from about 2.4 weeks to 5.3 weeks). This appears to be short compared with Canada's waiting time but may compare less favorably to countries like Germany, the Netherlands (where the goal was five weeks), and Switzerland.
It is unclear how many of the patients waiting longer have to. Some may be by choice, because they wish to go to a well-known specialist or clinic that many people wish to attend, and are willing to wait to do so. Waiting times may also vary by region. One experiment reported that uninsured patients experienced longer waits; patients with poor insurance coverage probably face a disproportionate number of long waits.
US healthcare tends to rely on rationing by exclusion (uninsured and underinsured), out-of-pocket costs for the insured, fixed payments per case to hospitals (resulting in very short stays), and contracts that manage demand instead.


==== Population health: quality, prevention, vulnerable populations ====
The health of the population is also viewed as a measure of the overall effectiveness of the healthcare system. The extent to which the population lives longer healthier lives signals an effective system.

While life expectancy is one measure, the HHS uses a composite health measure that estimates not only the average length of life but also the part of life expectancy that is expected to be "in good or better health, as well as free of activity limitations". Between 1997 and 2010, the number of expected high quality life years increased from 61.1 to 63.2 years for newborns.
The underutilization of preventative measures, rates of preventable illness and prevalence of chronic disease suggest that the US healthcare system does not sufficiently promote wellness. Over the past decade rates of teen pregnancy and low birth rates have come down significantly, but not disappeared. Rates of obesity, heart disease (high blood pressure, controlled high cholesterol), and type 2 diabetes are areas of major concern. While chronic disease and multiple comorbidities became increasingly common among a population of elderly Americans who were living longer, the public health system has also found itself fending off a rise of chronically ill younger generation. According to the US Surgeon General "The prevalence of obesity in the US more than doubled (from 15% to 34%) among adults and more than tripled (from 5% to 17%) among children and adolescents from 1980 to 2008."
A concern for the health system is that the health gains do not accrue equally to the entire population. In the US, disparities in healthcare and health outcomes are widespread. Minorities are more likely to develop serious illnesses (e.g., type 2 diabetes, heart disease and colon cancer) and less likely to have access to quality healthcare, including preventative services. Efforts are underway to close the gap and to provide a more equitable system of care.


==== Innovation: workforce, healthcare IT, R&D ====
Finally, the US tracks investment in the healthcare system in terms of a skilled healthcare workforce, meaningful use of healthcare IT, and R&D output. This aspect of the healthcare system performance dashboard is important to consider when evaluating cost of care in the US. That is because in much of the policy debate around the high cost of US healthcare, proponents of highly specialized and cutting-edge technologies point to innovation as a marker of an effective healthcare system.


=== Compared to other countries ===

A 2014 study by the private US foundation Commonwealth Fund found that although the US healthcare system is the most expensive in the world, it ranks last on most dimensions of performance when compared with Australia, Canada, France, Germany, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, and the UK. The study found that the US failed to achieve better outcomes than other countries, and is last or near last in terms of access, efficiency, and equity. Study data came from international surveys of patients and primary care physicians, as well as information on healthcare outcomes from Commonwealth Fund, the WHO, and the OECD.
As of 2017, the US stands 43rd in the world with a life expectancy of 80.00 years In 2007, the CIA World Factbook ranked the US 180th worst (out of 221)—meaning 42nd best—in the world for infant mortality rate (5.01/1,000 live births). Americans also undergo cancer screenings at significantly higher rates than people in other developed countries, and access MRI and CT scans at the highest rate of any OECD nation.
A study found that between 1997 and 2003, preventable deaths declined more slowly in the US than in 18 other industrialized nations. A 2008 study found that 101,000 people a year die in the US that would not if the healthcare system were as effective as that of France, Japan, or Australia. A 2020 study by the economists Anne Case and Angus Deaton argues that the US "spends huge sums of money for some of the worst health outcomes in the Western world".
The OECD found that the US ranked poorly in terms of years of potential life lost (YPLL), a statistical measure of years of life lost under the age of 70 that were amenable to being saved by healthcare. Among OECD nations for which data are available, the US ranked third last for the healthcare of women (after Mexico and Hungary) and fifth last for men (Slovakia and Poland also ranked worse).
Recent studies find growing gaps in life expectancy based on income and geography. In 2008, a government-sponsored study found that life expectancy declined from 1983 to 1999 for women in 180 counties, and for men in 11 counties, with most of the life expectancy declines occurring in the Deep South, Appalachia, along the Mississippi River, in the Southern Plains, and in Texas. The difference is as high as three years for men, six years for women. The gap is growing between rich and poor and by educational level, but narrowing between men and women and by race. Another study found that the mortality gap between the well-educated and the poorly educated widened significantly between 1993 and 2001 for adults ages 25 through 64; the authors speculated that risk factors such as smoking, obesity and high blood pressure may lie behind these disparities. In 2011 the US National Research Council forecasted that deaths attributed to smoking, on the decline in the US, will drop dramatically, improving life expectancy; it also suggested that one-fifth to one-third of the life expectancy difference can be attributed to obesity which is the worst in the world and has been increasing. In an analysis of breast cancer, colorectal cancer, and prostate cancer diagnosed during 1990–1994 in 31 countries, the US had the highest five-year relative survival rate for breast cancer and prostate cancer, although survival was systematically and substantially lower in Black US men and women.
The debate about US healthcare concerns questions of access, efficiency, and quality purchased by the high sums spent. The WHO in 2000 ranked the US healthcare system first in responsiveness, but 37th in overall performance and 72nd by overall level of health (among 191 member nations included in the study). The WHO study has been criticized by the free market advocate David Gratzer because "fairness in financial contribution" was used as an assessment factor, marking down countries with high per-capita private or fee-paying health treatment. The WHO study has been criticized, in an article published in Health Affairs, for its failure to include the satisfaction ratings of the general public. The study found that there was little correlation between the WHO rankings for health systems and the stated satisfaction of citizens using those systems. Countries such as Italy and Spain, which were given the highest ratings by WHO were ranked poorly by their citizens while other countries, such as Denmark and Finland, were given low scores by WHO but had the highest percentages of citizens reporting satisfaction with their healthcare systems. WHO staff, however, say that the WHO analysis does reflect system "responsiveness" and argue that this is a superior measure to consumer satisfaction, which is influenced by expectations. Furthermore, the relationship between patient satisfaction and healthcare utilization, expenditures, clinically meaningful measures, and the evaluation of outcomes is complex, not well defined, and only beginning to be explored.
A report released in April 2008 by the Foundation for Child Development, which studied the period from 1994 through 2006, found mixed results for the health of children in the US Mortality rates for children ages 1 through 4 dropped by a third, and the percentage of children with elevated blood lead levels dropped by 84%. The percentage of mothers who smoked during pregnancy also declined. On the other hand, both obesity and the percentage of low-birth weight babies increased. The authors note that the increase in babies born with low birth weights can be attributed to women delaying childbearing and the increased use of fertility drugs.
In a sample of 13 developed countries, the US was third in its population weighted usage of medication in 14 classes in both 2009 and 2013. The drugs studied were selected on the basis that the conditions treated had high incidence, prevalence and/or mortality, caused significant long-term morbidity and incurred high levels of expenditure and significant developments in prevention or treatment had been made in the last 10 years. The study noted considerable difficulties in cross border comparison of medication use.
A critic of the US healthcare system, British philanthropist Stan Brock, whose charity Remote Area Medical has served over half a million uninsured Americans, stated, "You could be blindfolded and stick a pin on a map of America and you will find people in need." The charity has over 700 clinics and 80,000 volunteer doctors and nurses around the US Simon Usborne of The Independent writes that in the UK "General practitioners are amazed to hear that poor Americans should need to rely on a charity that was originally conceived to treat people in the developing world."


== System efficiency and equity ==

Variations in the efficiency of healthcare delivery can cause variations in outcomes. The Dartmouth Atlas Project, for instance, reported that, for over 20 years, marked variations in how medical resources are distributed and used in the US were accompanied by marked variations in outcomes. The willingness of physicians to work in an area varies with the income of the area and the amenities it offers, a situation aggravated by a general shortage of doctors in the US, particularly those who offer primary care. The ACA is anticipated to produce an additional demand for services which the existing stable of primary care doctors will be unable to fill, particularly in economically depressed areas. Training additional physicians would require some years.
Lean manufacturing techniques such as value stream mapping can help identify and subsequently mitigate waste associated with costs of healthcare. Other product engineering tools such as FMEA and Fish Bone Diagrams have been used to improve efficiencies in healthcare delivery.
Since 2004 the Commonwealth Fund has produced reports comparing healthcare systems in high income countries using survey and administrative data from the OECD and WHO which is analyzed under five themes: access to care, the care process, administrative efficiency, equity and healthcare outcomes. The US has been assessed as worst healthcare system overall among 11 high-income countries in every report, even though it spends the highest proportion of its gross domestic product on healthcare. In 2021 Norway, the Netherlands and Australia were the top-performing countries. The US spent 16.8% of GDP on healthcare in 2019; the next highest country on the list was Switzerland, at 11.3% of GDP. The lowest was New Zealand, which spent roughly 9% of its GDP on healthcare in 2019. It "consistently demonstrated the largest disparities between income groups" across indicators, apart from those related to preventive services and the safety of care.


=== Efficiency ===


==== Preventable deaths ====
In 2010, coronary artery disease, lung cancer, stroke, chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases, and traffic accidents caused the most years of life lost in the US. Low back pain, depression, musculoskeletal disorders, neck pain, and anxiety caused the most years lost to disability. The most deleterious risk factors were poor diet, tobacco smoking, obesity, high blood pressure, high blood sugar, physical inactivity, and alcohol use. Alzheimer's disease, drug abuse, kidney disease and cancer, and falls caused the most additional years of life lost over their age-adjusted 1990 per-capita rates.
Between 1990 and 2010, among the 34 countries in the OECD, the US dropped from 18th to 27th in age-standardized death rate. The US dropped from 23rd to 28th for age-standardized years of life lost. It dropped from 20th to 27th in life expectancy at birth. It dropped from 14th to 26th for healthy life expectancy.
According to a 2009 study conducted at Harvard Medical School by cofounders of Physicians for a National Health Program, a pro-single payer lobbying group, and published by the American Journal of Public Health, lack of health coverage is associated with nearly 45,000 excess preventable deaths annually. Since then, as the number of uninsured has risen from about 46 million in 2009 to 49 million in 2012, the number of preventable deaths due to lack of insurance has grown to about 48,000 per year. The group's methodology has been criticized by economist John C. Goodman for not looking at cause of death or tracking insurance status changes over time, including the time of death.
A 2009 study by former Clinton policy adviser Richard Kronick published in the journal Health Services Research found no increased mortality from being uninsured after certain risk factors were controlled for.


==== Value for money ====
A study of international healthcare spending levels published in the health policy journal Health Affairs in the year 2000 found that the US spends substantially more on healthcare than any other country in the OECD (OECD), and that the use of healthcare services in the US is below the OECD median by most measures. The authors of the study conclude that the prices paid for healthcare services are much higher in the US than elsewhere. While the 19 next most wealthy countries by GDP all pay less than half what the US does for healthcare, they have all gained about six years of life expectancy more than the US since 1970.


==== Affordability ====
In 2023, American gold medal-winning gymnast Mary Lou Retton, critically ill with pneumonia, did not have health insurance, and, like many thousands of Americans who could not afford coverage, turned to crowdfunding to raise money for her medical expenses.


==== Delays in seeking care and increased use of emergency care ====
Uninsured Americans are less likely to have regular healthcare and use preventive services. They are more likely to delay seeking care, resulting in more medical crises, which are more expensive than ongoing treatment for such conditions as diabetes and high blood pressure. A 2007 study published in JAMA concluded that uninsured people were less likely than the insured to receive any medical care after an accidental injury or the onset of a new chronic condition. The uninsured with an injury were also twice as likely as those with insurance to have received none of the recommended follow-up care, and a similar pattern held for those with a new chronic condition. Uninsured patients are twice as likely to visit hospital emergency rooms as those with insurance; burdening a system meant for true emergencies with less-urgent care needs.
In 2008 researchers with the American Cancer Society found that individuals who lacked private insurance (including those covered by Medicaid) were more likely to be diagnosed with late-stage cancer than those who had such insurance.


==== Variations in provider practices ====
The treatment given to a patient can vary significantly depending on which healthcare providers they use. Research suggests that some cost-effective treatments are not used as often as they should be, while overutilization occurs with other healthcare services. Unnecessary treatments increase costs and can cause patients unnecessary anxiety. The use of prescription drugs varies significantly by geographic region. The overuse of medical benefits is known as moral hazard—individuals who are insured are then more inclined to consume healthcare. The way the healthcare system tries to eliminate this problem is through cost sharing tactics like copays and deductibles. If patients face more of the economic burden they will then only consume healthcare when they perceive it to be necessary. According to the RAND health insurance experiment, individuals with higher coinsurance rates consumed less healthcare than those with lower rates. The experiment concluded that with less consumption of care there was generally no loss in societal welfare but, for the poorer and sicker groups of people there were definitely negative effects. These patients were forced to forgo necessary preventative care measures in order to save money leading to late diagnosis of easily treated diseases and more expensive procedures later. With less preventative care, the patient is hurt financially with an increase in expensive visits to the ER. The healthcare costs in the US will also rise with these procedures as well. More expensive procedures lead to greater costs.
One study has found significant geographic variations in Medicare spending for patients in the last two years of life. These spending levels are associated with the amount of hospital capacity available in each area. Higher spending did not result in patients living longer.


==== Care coordination ====
Primary care doctors are often the point of entry for most patients needing care, but in the fragmented healthcare system of the US, many patients and their providers experience problems with care coordination. For example, a Harris Interactive survey of California physicians found that:

Four of every ten physicians report that their patients have had problems with coordination of their care in the last 12 months.
More than 60% of doctors report that their patients "sometimes" or "often" experience long wait times for diagnostic tests.
Some 20% of doctors report having their patients repeat tests because of an inability to locate the results during a scheduled visit.
According to an article in The New York Times, the relationship between doctors and patients is deteriorating. A study from Johns Hopkins University found that roughly one in four patients believe their doctors have exposed them to unnecessary risks, and anecdotal evidence such as self-help books and web postings suggest increasing patient frustration. Possible factors behind the deteriorating doctor/patient relationship include the current system for training physicians and differences in how doctors and patients view the practice of medicine. Doctors may focus on diagnosis and treatment, while patients may be more interested in wellness and being listened to by their doctors.
Many primary care physicians no longer see their patients while they are in the hospital; instead, hospitalists are used. The use of hospitalists is sometimes mandated by health insurance companies as a cost-saving measure which is resented by some primary care physicians.


==== Administrative costs ====
As of 2017, there were 907 health insurance companies in the US, although the top 10 account for about 53% of revenue and the top 100 account for 95% of revenue.: 70  The number of insurers contributes to administrative overhead in excess of that in nationalized, single-payer systems, such as that in Canada, where administrative overhead was estimated to be about half of the US.
Insurance industry group America's Health Insurance Plans estimates that administrative costs have averaged approximately 12% of premiums over the last 40 years, with costs shifting away from adjudicating claims and towards medical management, nurse help lines, and negotiating discounted fees with healthcare providers.
A 2003 study published by the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association (BCBSA) also found that health insurer administrative costs were approximately 11% to 12% of premiums, with Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans reporting slightly lower administrative costs, on average, than commercial insurers. For the period 1998 through 2003, average insurer administrative costs declined from 13% to 12% of premiums. The largest increases in administrative costs were in customer service and information technology, and the largest decreases were in provider services and contracting and in general administration. The McKinsey Global Institute estimated that excess spending on "health administration and insurance" accounted for as much as 21% of the estimated total excess spending ($477 billion in 2003).
According to a report published by the CBO in 2008, administrative costs for private insurance represent approximately 12% of premiums. Variations in administrative costs between private plans are largely attributable to economies of scale. Coverage for large employers has the lowest administrative costs. The percentage of premium attributable to administration increases for smaller firms, and is highest for individually purchased coverage. A 2009 study published by BCBSA found that the average administrative expense cost for all commercial health insurance products was represented 9.2% of premiums in 2008. Administrative costs were 11.1% of premiums for small group products and 16.4% in the individual market.
One study of the billing and insurance-related (BIR) costs borne not only by insurers but also by physicians and hospitals found that BIR among insurers, physicians, and hospitals in California represented 20–22% of privately insured spending in California acute care settings.


==== Long-term living facilities ====
As of 2014, according to a report published the higher the skill of the RN the lower the cost of a financial burden on the facilities. With a growing elderly population, the number of patients in these long term facilities needing more care creates a jump in financial costs. Based on research done in 2010, annual out of pocket costs jumped 7.5% while the cost for Medicare grew 6.7% annually due to the increases. While Medicare pays for some of the care that the elderly populations receive, 40% of the patients staying in these facilities pay out of pocket.


=== Third-party payment problem and consumer-driven insurance ===
Most Americans pay for medical services largely through insurance, and this can distort the incentives of consumers since the consumer pays only a portion of the ultimate cost directly. The lack of price information on medical services can also distort incentives. The insurance which pays on behalf of insureds negotiate with medical providers, sometimes using government-established prices such as Medicaid billing rates as a reference point. This reasoning has led for calls to reform the insurance system to create a consumer-driven healthcare system whereby consumers pay more out-of-pocket. In 2003, the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act was passed, which encourages consumers to have a high-deductible health plan and a health savings account. In October 2019, the state of Colorado proposed running public healthcare option through private insurers, which are to bear the brunt of the costs. Premiums under the public option are touted to be 9% to 18% cheaper by 2022.


=== Equity ===


==== Mental health ====

In 2020, 52.9 million adults were affected by mental illness, nearly one in five adults in the country. 44.7 million adults were affected in 2016. In 2006, mental disorders were ranked one of the top five most costly medical conditions, with expenditures of $57.5 billion (equivalent to $83.6 billion in 2023). A lack of mental health coverage for Americans bears significant ramifications to the US economy and social system. A report by the US Surgeon General found that mental illnesses are the second leading cause of disability in the nation and affect 20% of all Americans. It is estimated that less than half of all people with mental illnesses receive treatment (or specifically, an ongoing, much needed, and managed care; where medication alone, cannot easily remove mental conditions) due to factors such as stigma and lack of access to care, including a shortage of mental health professionals. Treatment rates are understood to vary between different conditions; as an example, only 16% of adults with schizophrenia and 25% with bipolar disorder were estimated to be untreated with appropriate medication in 2007. Some entities try to expand access to mental health services by providing access on a sliding-scale or reduced fee structure. Networks such as Open Path Collective are composed of professionals who offer their services to people who cannot otherwise find affordable treatment through insurance.
The Paul Wellstone Mental Health and Addiction Equity Act of 2008 mandates that group health plans provide mental health and substance-related disorder benefits that are at least equivalent to benefits offered for medical and surgical procedures. The legislation renews and expands provisions of the Mental Health Parity Act of 1996. The law requires financial equity for annual and lifetime mental health benefits, and compels parity in treatment limits and expands all equity provisions to addiction services. Insurance companies and third-party disability administrators (most notably, Sedgwick CMS) used loopholes and, though providing financial equity, they often worked around the law by applying unequal copayments or setting limits on the number of days spent in inpatient or outpatient treatment facilities.


==== Oral health ====
In the US, dental care is largely not recognized as healthcare, even though individuals visit a dentist more often than a general practitioner, and thus the field and its practices developed independently. In modern policy and practice, oral health is thus considered distinct from primary health, and dental insurance is separate from health insurance. Disparities in oral healthcare accessibility mean that many populations, including those without insurance, the low-income, uninsured, racial minorities, immigrants, and rural populations, have a higher probability of poor oral health at every age. While changes have been made to address these disparities for children, the oral health disparity in adults of all previously listed populations has remained consistent or worsened.
The magnitude of this health issue is surprising even in New York state, where the Medicaid program includes dental coverage and is one of the most impressive insurance programs in the nation. Seven out of ten older adults (aged ≥ 65) have periodontal disease, and one in four adults (aged > 65) has no teeth. This raises concern about the New York State Department of Health's rule, which prevents Medicaid coverage for the replacement of dentures within eight years of initial placement and a ban on coverage of dental implants. In addition, older adults are more likely than those in younger age groups to have medical conditions, such as diabetes and cardiovascular disease, that worsen their oral health.


==== Medical underwriting and the uninsurable ====
Prior to the ACA, medical underwriting was common, but, after the law came into effect in 2014, it became effectively prohibited.


==== Demographic differences ====

Health disparities are well documented in the United States in ethnic minorities such as African Americans, Native Americans, and Hispanics. When compared to white people, these minority groups have a higher incidence of chronic diseases, higher mortality, poorer health outcomes, and poorer rates of diagnosis and treatment. Among the disease-specific examples of racial and ethnic disparities in the US is the cancer incidence rate among African Americans, which is 25% higher than among white people. In addition, adult African Americans and Hispanics have approximately twice the risk as white people of developing diabetes and have higher overall obesity rates. Minorities also have higher rates of cardiovascular disease and HIV/AIDS than white people. In the US, racial demographics are as follows: Asian American (87.1 years), followed by Latino (83.3 years), White (78.9 years), Native American (76.9 years), and African American (75.4 years). A 2001 study found distinguished racial differences exist in healthy life expectancy at lower levels of education.
Public spending is positively correlated with age; average per capita public spending for seniors was more than five times that for children ($6,921 versus $1,225, equivalent to $11,724 versus $2,075 in 2023). Average public spending for non-Hispanic blacks ($2,973, equivalent to $5,036 in 2023) was slightly higher than that for white people ($2,675, equivalent to $4,531 in 2023) while spending for Hispanics ($1,967, equivalent to $3,332 in 2023) was significantly lower than the population average ($2,612, equivalent to $4,425 in 2023)). Total public spending is also strongly correlated with self-reported health status ($13,770 [equivalent to $23,326 in 2023] for those reporting "poor" health versus $1,279 [equivalent to $2,167 in 2023] for those reporting "excellent" health). Seniors make up 13% of the population but take one-third of all prescription drugs. The average senior fills 38 prescriptions annually. A new study has also found that older men and women in the South are more likely to be prescribed antibiotics than older Americans elsewhere, even though there is no evidence that the South has higher rates of diseases requiring antibiotics.
There is considerable research into inequalities in healthcare where in certain cases, these inequalities are caused by income disparities that result in lack of health insurance and other barriers, such as medical equipment, to receiving necessary services. In some cases, these inequalities are caused by income disparities that result in lack of health insurance and other barriers, such as medical equipment, to receiving services. According to the 2009 National Healthcare Disparities Report, uninsured Americans are less likely to receive preventive services in healthcare. For example, minorities are not regularly screened for colon cancer and the death rate for colon cancer has increased among African Americans and Hispanic people. In other cases, inequalities in healthcare reflect a systemic bias in the way medical procedures and treatments are prescribed for different racial and ethnic groups. Raj Bhopal, professor emeritus at University of Edinburgh, writes that the history of racism in science and medicine shows that people and institutions behave according to the ethos of their times. Nancy Krieger, professor of social epidemiology at Harvard, wrote that racism underlies unexplained inequities in healthcare, including treatment for heart disease, renal failure, bladder cancer, and pneumonia. Results from a 2023 scoping review of the literature found that in studies conducted in multiracial or multiethnic populations, race or ethnicity variables were rarely included in conceptually thoughtful and analytically informative ways concerning race or ethnicity as markers of exposure to racialized social disadvantage. Bhopal writes that these inequalities have been documented in numerous studies whose consistent and repeated findings were that Black Americans received less healthcare than white Americans—particularly when the care involved expensive new technology. The consistent and repeated findings were that Black Americans received less healthcare than white Americans—particularly when the care involved expensive new technology. One recent study has found that when minority and white patients use the same hospital, they are given the same standard of care. The lack of equitable access to different resources is intrinsically tied to the field of public health, which works to supplement the traditional medical system with other services and opportunities.
Medical devices are expensive because the process of designing and approving them is extensive and costly, requiring that they be sold at higher than market price. The costs include research, design and development, meeting the U.S. Food and Drug Administration's regulatory guidelines, manufacture, marketing, distribution, and business plan. Cost, alongside the impact of systematic oppression and inequality of communities of color within healthcare, together make medical equipment inaccessible. Most studies focused on access to medical devices and enhancement of affordable local production have concluded that increasing access to medical devices in an attempt to meet healthcare needs is highly critical.
The increase of artificial intelligence (AI) in health care raises issues of equity and bias related to how health applications are developed and used. AI expansion is now of serious global interest towards public and private investment. The Harrow Council launched the IBM Watson Care Manager system to match individuals, considering budget, with a provider and develop individual care plans. Within the US, the FDA in 2017 cleared an AI medical imaging platform for clinical use as well as future devices. A recent scoping review identified 18 equity issues with 15 strategies to address them to try to ensure that AI applications equitably meet the needs of the populations intended to benefit from them.


==== Coverage of social determinants of health ====

The access to medical care and services in the US is tied to the field of public health, which works to supplement the traditional medical system with other services and opportunities to improve the social determinants of health (SDOH) of populations. SDOH are external factors, systems, and structures that shape the experiences of different individuals and their access to healthcare. Examples of SDOH are poverty, work conditions, exposure to violence, substance abuse history, housing insecurity, and more. Studies have shown that people have adverse SDOH are more likely to experience negative health effects.  In order to address these other upstream factors, some states have implemented Section 1115 waivers under Medicaid and Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP), which allow for coverage of nontraditional services such as home-delivered meals, medical transportation, and educational services.


==== Trauma-informed care ====

Some providers in the US advocate for the use of Trauma-informed care frameworks within their practice. Trauma-informed care frameworks center a patient's experience with trauma in the treatment plan and view medical care as one aspect of treatment. Advocates argue that doing so fosters more equitable and culturally sensitive care that is especially important when serving patients from marginalized communities. Clinically, trauma-informed care can strengthen the social determinants of health of patients, as well as provide impactful interventions for patients at high risk.  In violent trauma care settings, providers have been advocating for the implementation of Hospital-Based Intervention Programs (HVIPs) at all Level 1 trauma centers to deliver trauma-informed care addressing social determinants of health of patients post-injury, in order to better prevent re-injury. Others suggest that upstream education during medical training is more beneficial, so healthcare providers themselves can manage clinical medicine and SDOH together. 


== Prescription drug issues ==


=== Drug efficiency and safety ===

The FDA is the primary institution tasked with the safety and effectiveness of human and veterinary drugs. It also is responsible for making sure drug information is accurately and informatively presented to the public. The FDA reviews and approves products and establishes drug labeling, drug standards, and medical device manufacturing standards. It sets performance standards for radiation and ultrasonic equipment.
One of the more contentious issues related to drug safety is immunity from prosecution. In 2004, the FDA reversed a federal policy, arguing that FDA premarket approval overrides most claims for damages under state law for medical devices. In 2008, this was confirmed by the Supreme Court in Riegel v. Medtronic, Inc.
On June 30, 2006, an FDA ruling went into effect extending protection from lawsuits to pharmaceutical manufacturers, even if it was found that they submitted fraudulent clinical trial data to the FDA in their quest for approval. This left consumers who experience serious health consequences from drug use with little recourse. In 2007, the House of Representatives expressed opposition to the FDA ruling, but the Senate took no action. On March 4, 2009, an important US Supreme Court decision was handed down. In Wyeth v. Levine, the court asserted that state-level rights of action could not be pre-empted by federal immunity and could provide "appropriate relief for injured consumers". In June 2009, under the Public Readiness and Emergency Preparedness Act, Secretary of Health and Human Services Kathleen Sebelius signed an order extending protection to vaccine makers and federal officials from prosecution during a declared health emergency related to the administration of the swine flu vaccine.


=== Prescription drug prices ===

During the 1990s, the price of prescription drugs became a major issue in US politics as the prices of many new drugs increased significantly, and many citizens discovered that neither the government nor their insurer would cover the cost of such drugs. Per capita, the US spends more on pharmaceuticals than any other country, although expenditures on pharmaceuticals accounts for a smaller share (13%) of total healthcare costs compared to an OECD average of 18% (2003 figures). Some 25% of out-of-pocket spending by individuals is for prescription drugs. Another study finds that between 1990 and 2016, prescription drug prices in the US increased by 277% while prescription drug prices increased by only 57% in the UK, 13% in Canada, and decreased in France and Japan. A November 2020 study by the West Health Policy Center stated that more than 1.1 million senior citizens in the U.S. Medicare program are expected to die prematurely over the next decade because they will be unable to afford their prescription medications, requiring an additional $17.7 billion to be spent annually on avoidable medical costs due to health complications.
The US government has taken the position (through the Office of the US Trade Representative) that US drug prices are rising because US consumers are effectively subsidizing costs which drug companies cannot recover from consumers in other countries (because many other countries use their bulk-purchasing power to aggressively negotiate drug prices). The US position (consistent with the primary lobbying position of the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America) is that the governments of such countries are free riding on the backs of US consumers. Such governments should either deregulate their markets, or raise their domestic taxes in order to fairly compensate US consumers by directly remitting the difference (between what the companies would earn in an open market versus what they are earning now) to drug companies or to the US government. In turn, pharmaceutical companies would be able to continue to produce innovative pharmaceuticals while lowering prices for US consumers. Currently, the US, as a purchaser of pharmaceuticals, negotiates some drug prices but is forbidden by law from negotiating drug prices for the Medicare program due to the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act passed in 2003. Democrats have charged that the purpose of this provision is merely to allow the pharmaceutical industry to profiteer off of the Medicare program.


==== Impact of drug companies ====
The US, along with New Zealand, make up the only countries in the world that allows direct-to-consumer advertising of prescription drugs. The Food and Drug Administration in the United States, mainly under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic, oversees the advertising of prescription drugs to ensure accurate and truthful communication. In 2015, the American Medical Association called for the banning of direct-to-consumer advertising because it is linked with increased drug prices. Physicians, via various FDA surveys, conveyed varying thoughts regarding ads as they believe while patients were getting more involved in their own healthcare, they felt pressured to prescribe specific drugs or felt concern over methods of communication about risks and benefits of the drug. Still, other evidence cites that there are some benefits to direct-to-consumer advertising, such as encouraging patients to see the doctor, diagnosis of rare diseases, and the removal of stigma associated with the disease.
When healthcare legislation was being written in 2009, the drug companies were asked to support the legislation in return for not allowing importation of drugs from foreign countries. There were and are many complications regarding drug legislation due to the relationship between pharmaceutical companies and the federal government. Legislation relating to drug prices in particular tends to cause several issues. The Inflation Reduction Act of 2022, while still undergoing negotiations for roughly the next two years, attempts to renegotiate drug prices by amending the non-interference clause in the Medicare Part D program. The non-interference clause states that the government is prohibited from interfering in negotiations with drug manufacturers, insurers and pharmacies.


== Healthcare reform debate ==

In 2008, prior to the major healthcare reform in 2010, Americans were divided in their views of the US health system; 45% said that the US system was best and 39% said that other countries' systems are better.
Much of the historical debate around healthcare reform centered around single-payer healthcare, and particularly pointing to the hidden costs of treating the uninsured while free-market advocates point to freedom of choice in purchasing health insurance and unintended consequences of government intervention, citing the Health Maintenance Organization Act of 1973.
According to a 2020 study published in The Lancet, a single-payer universal healthcare system could save 68,000 lives and $450 billion in national healthcare expenditure annually, while another 2022 study published in the PNAS, estimated that a universal healthcare system could have saved more than 338,000 lives during the COVID-19 pandemic in the US from its start until March 2022.
Ultimately, a single-payer healthcare, sometimes called "socialized medicine", was not adopted in the final ACA.


=== Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010) ===
The ACA (Public Law 111–148) is a healthcare reform bill that was signed into law in the US by President Barack Obama on March 23, 2010. The law includes a large number of health-related provisions, most of which took effect in 2014, including expanding Medicaid eligibility for people making up to 133% of FPL, subsidizing insurance premiums for individuals and families making up to 400% of FPL and capping expenses from 2% to 9.8% of annual income. For the first time, all health policies sold in the US must cap an individual's (or family's) medical expenses out of pocket annually. Other provisions include providing incentives for businesses to provide healthcare benefits, prohibiting denial of coverage and denial of claims based on pre-existing conditions, establishing health insurance exchanges, prohibiting insurers from establishing annual spending caps and support for medical research. The costs of these provisions are offset by a variety of taxes, fees, and cost-saving measures, such as new Medicare taxes for high-income brackets, taxes on indoor tanning, cuts to the Medicare Advantage program in favor of traditional Medicare, and fees on medical devices and pharmaceutical companies; there is also a tax penalty for citizens who do not obtain health insurance (unless they are exempt due to low income or other reasons). The Congressional Budget Office estimates that the net effect (including the reconciliation act) will be a reduction in the federal deficit by $143 billion over the first decade. However, two months later, the office subsequently acknowledged that there was an additional $115 billion in funds needed that were not originally included in the estimate. Additionally, the CBO estimated that although projected premiums in 2016 would be lower by $100 per person for small and large business health insurance plans with the ACA than without, individual plans would be higher by $1,900 with the bill.
The first open enrollment period of the ACA began in October 2013. Prior to this period, access to healthcare and insurance coverage trends were worsening on a national level. A large, national survey of US adults found that after the act's first two enrollment periods, self-reported coverage, health, and access to care improved significantly. Furthermore, insurance coverage for low-income adults were significantly greater in states that expanded Medicaid in comparison with states that did not expand Medicaid. However, discrepancies do exist between those covered by Medicaid versus those covered by private insurance. Those insured by Medicaid tend to report fair or poor health, as opposed to excellent or very good health.
On December 22, 2017, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 was signed into law by President Donald Trump. Inside the final version of the bill was a repeal of the individual mandate in the ACA, which required individuals and companies to get healthcare for themselves and their employees. It was this mandate which kept healthcare costs down under the PPACA by promoting cost sharing over a larger pool. Economists believe the repeal of the individual mandate will lead to higher premiums and lower enrollment in the current market though they do not agree with how much. In 2017, the new Republican healthcare bill known as the American Health Care Act was passed by the House of Representatives under President Donald Trump. Although the ACA and the American Health Care Act both propose tax cuts in order to make insurance more affordable for Americans, each of these bills affected Americans in different ways. The people most affected by President Trump's plan are young people, individuals of a higher socioeconomic status, and people who live in urban areas. Young people because individuals between the age of 20 and 30 will see drops in the premiums they pay within their plans. Individuals with higher socioeconomic status because whereas under Obamacare individuals could only make up to $50,000 annually and still receive tax breaks, now under Trump's plan that number has been increased so that individuals who make up to $115,000 annually can receive tax breaks. In addition, those in urban areas can also benefit from the plan because under Obamacare tax credits were designated also by the cost of local healthcare, but the American Health Care Act does not take this into consideration although rural healthcare is generally more expensive due to the lack of hospitals and available services.
In May 2023, an international daily, in its article on the US healthcare system, asserted on the need for United States to guarantee healthcare to all its citizens as a basic human right.


== Health insurance coverage for immigrants ==

Of the 26.2 million foreign immigrants living in the US in 1998, 62.9% were non-US citizens. In 1997, 34.3% of non-US citizens living in the US did not have health insurance coverage opposed to the 14.2% of native-born Americans who do not have health insurance coverage. Among those immigrants who became citizens, 18.5% were uninsured, as opposed to noncitizens, who are 43.6% uninsured. In each age and income group, immigrants are less likely to have health insurance. With the recent healthcare changes, many legal immigrants with various immigration statuses now are able qualify for affordable health insurance.
Undocumented immigrants within the US do not have access to government funded health insurance. Although the ACA allows immigrants to receive insurance at a discounted rate, the same does not go for those without US citizenship. While policies like the Patient Protection Act and Affordable Care Act have aimed at expanding health insurance coverage to also improve refugee health in the US, different states have implemented their health insurance programs differently leading to healthcare access disparities between states. Undocumented immigrants in the US can seek medical help from community centers, or what is termed Safety Net Providers, and participate in fee for service medical assistance, but can only buy health insurance from private health insurers.


== See also ==


== References ==


== Further reading ==


== External links ==

National Center for Health Statistics from the CDC
National Health Expenditure Data (US) from the HHS
US profile from the WHO
And Pharma Market Research Report Archived April 12, 2023, at the Wayback Machine
Healthcare Market Resources

Document similaire: Impact of prostitution on mental health (Similarité: 0.6314)
The Impact of prostitution on mental health refers to the psychological, cognitive, and emotional consequences experienced by individuals involved in prostitution. These consequences include a wide range of mental health issues and difficulties in emotional management and interpersonal relationships. Prostitution is closely linked to various psychological pathologies and affects not only those directly involved but also society at large. Studies have shown that both street and indoor sex workers have experienced high levels of abuse in childhood and adulthood, with differences in trauma rates between the two groups.
Women in prostitution experience a profound impact on their identity, encompassing cognitive, physical, and emotional dimensions, manifesting in health problems and difficulties in emotional management and interpersonal relationships. Prostitution, being strongly linked to psychopathology and social health, should be addressed as a medical situation that affects not only the individuals involved but also society at large, with psychological aspects.
Sex work involves the provision of one or more sexual services in exchange for money or goods. However, sex workers are not a homogeneous group. Street sex workers are often illegal, finding clients on the street and providing services in alleys or clients' cars. On the other hand, indoor sex workers operate in brothels, massage parlors, or as private escorts. Previous research has shown that both street and indoor sex workers have experienced high levels of abuse in childhood and adulthood, though indoor sex workers report lower rates of abuse and trauma compared to street workers.
There is a high prevalence of victimization in childhood and adulthood among sex workers, with secondary trauma disorders. Recurrent victimization, known as "Type II trauma," can cause pathological psychological changes that are difficult to classify. Proposed diagnoses include developmental trauma disorder for childhood and complex post-traumatic stress disorder (cPTSD) for adulthood, though these are not included in official diagnostic manuals.
There is a connection between prostitution and trafficking, organized crimes that reflect sexism, patriarchy, capitalism, and economic inequality. The physical consequences of sexual exploitation include sexually transmitted diseases, cervical cancer, chronic pain, liver problems, unintended pregnancies, eating disorders, concentration and memory difficulties, visual and hearing problems, fractures, and, in extreme cases, death. Psychologically, women suffer from low self-esteem, stress, pathological ties with control networks, social isolation, loneliness, extreme fear, hopelessness, and a lack of assertiveness in seeking support, resulting in trauma that alters their beliefs and perceptions, causing irreparable damage to their personal identity. These conditions are exacerbated by language barriers and other vulnerability factors, such as having suffered sexual abuse in childhood or being the main economic support for their family, which is exploited by pimps.
The effects on mental health are severe, with high rates of depression, anxiety, and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) among those who sell sex, exacerbated by social stigma, discrimination, physical violence, and mistreatment by authorities. Studies in the United States and Canada reveal depression symptoms in 68% of these individuals and PTSD symptoms in nearly a third, showing higher rates than in combat veterans. Substance abuse is common, generally as a response to sex work rather than a cause, with most increasing drug use to cope with their reality.
The sex industry is a global business worth $57 billion annually, with the United States hosting the largest number of adult clubs in the world, employing over 500,000 people. Between 66% and 90% of women in this industry were sexually abused during their childhood. These women have higher rates of substance abuse, sexually transmitted infections, domestic violence, depression, violent aggression, rape, and PTSD compared to the general population.
The emotional effects of prostitution are devastating. Dissociation, a response to uncontrollable traumatic events, is common among prostituted individuals, similar to the response of prisoners of war. Research has shown that both indoor and outdoor sex work increase the risk of being assaulted. In outdoor sex work 82% of women reported being physically assaulted, and 68% reported being raped. In indoor settings, more sexual violence and threats with weapons were reported. Women in the sex industry frequently face multiple psychosocial stressors, limited resources, and a high rate of untreated health and legal problems.
Other studies that assessed the presence of psychological alterations in prostitutes, compared to non-prostitutes, also documented concentration and memory difficulties, as well as sleep problems (with an incidence of 79%), irritability (64%), anxiety (60%), phobias (26%), panic attacks (24%), compulsions (37%), obsessions (53%), fatigue (82%), and concerns about physical health (35%), and 30% of the sample reported a suicide attempt.


== Context ==

The consequences of being repeatedly bought and sold for sex with strangers result in a variety of medical issues, including malnutrition, pregnancy-related problems, old and new injuries from sexual assaults and physical attacks such as burns, broken bones, stab wounds, dental trauma, traumatic brain injuries, anogenital injuries (rectal prolapse/vaginal injuries), internal injuries, sexually transmitted infections, and untreated chronic medical conditions. Individuals in prostitution are subjected to multiple forms of violence, such as rape, sexual assault, emotional abuse, economic and physical abuse, food deprivation and sleep deprivation, and acts of torture by pimps, traffickers, brothel owners, and sex buyers. This results in cumulative psychological and physical trauma with lifelong impacts. Individuals in prostitution often experience stress and multiple traumas, such as physical or sexual abuse in childhood, the sexual exploitation itself, and homelessness, and may have difficulty remembering details of their lives due to traumatic brain injuries, cognitive impairment, repressed memories, or dissociation, largely caused by pimps, traffickers, and sex buyers. Reported psychiatric disorders include depression, anxiety, schizophrenia, eating disorders, sexual dysfunction, substance abuse, suicidal ideation or suicide attempts, self-harm, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and dissociative disorders.
Dissociation, a severe symptom related to trauma, is common and develops as a coping strategy in response to extremely painful, frightening, or potentially life-threatening events. Additionally, pimps and traffickers often control victims' access to medical care, allowing them to seek help only when injuries or illnesses are particularly severe or if their ability to earn money is affected, but often prohibiting preventive or follow-up care. The traumatic scars from this physical and psychological damage are permanent. Children trafficked for sex are the most vulnerable to medical and psychological harm. Entry into prostitution typically occurs during childhood and adolescence, with most initially lured by a "boyfriend" and/or "protector." While not all enter the sex trade through a pimp or trafficker, each encounter with a sex buyer puts the individual at risk of harm. Studies suggest that up to 50% of human trafficking victims seek medical care while in trafficking situations. The harmful effects of prostitution are reflected in the high rates of PTSD among survivors, with symptoms such as anxiety, depression, insomnia, irritability, recurrent memories, emotional numbness, and hypervigilance. Of 475 individuals in prostitution interviewed in five countries, 67% met the diagnostic criteria for PTSD, indicating that the traumatic consequences of prostitution are similar across cultures. Individuals in prostitution suffer extremely high levels of violence: 62% of women report being raped and 73% report being physically assaulted in the sex trade. Transgender youth in prostitution are over four times more likely to have HIV than those without such a history. The mortality rates for women in prostitution are 40 to 50 times the national average. Among known victims of fatal violence against transgender individuals in the U.S. from 2013 to 2018, 32% were in the sex trade, including many who died while in prostitution.
In "Prostitution and the Invisibility of Harm," Melissa Farley examines how the harms associated with prostitution are invisible in society, law, public health, and psychology. Farley argues that the invisibility of these harms originates from the use of terms that conceal the inherent violence of prostitution, as well as from public health perspectives and psychological theories that ignore the harm inflicted by men on women in prostitution. The author summarizes literature documenting the overwhelming physical and psychological harms suffered by individuals in prostitution and discusses the interconnection of prostitution with racism, colonialism, and child sexual abuse. Farley describes prostitution as a form of sexual violence that generates economic benefits for perpetrators and argues that, like slavery, it is a lucrative form of oppression. She highlights how institutions protect the commercial sex industry due to its enormous profits, and how these institutions, deeply rooted in cultures, become invisible. The author criticizes the normalization of prostitution by researchers, public health agencies, and the law, pointing out the contradiction in opposing human trafficking while promoting "consensual sex work." Farley argues that assuming consent in prostitution erases its harm and mentions that the line between coercion and consent in prostitution is deliberately blurred. The author proposes using terms that maintain the dignity of women in prostitution and criticizes the use of terms that disguise the inherent violence of this practice. Furthermore, the article documents the prevalence of physical and sexual violence in prostitution, citing studies showing high percentages of rape and physical assault among women in this situation. Farley also highlights the similarity between domestic violence and violence in prostitution, suggesting that treatment approaches for battered women are also applicable to prostituted women. Finally, Farley addresses the intersection of racism and colonialism in prostitution, pointing out how women are exploited based on their appearance and ethnic stereotypes, and discusses how child sexual abuse sets the stage for prostitution in adolescence and adulthood.

Research on the psychological impact associated with sex work, especially when exposed to violent situations, has shown that this activity is linked to the development of psychological stress and many other negative consequences in the short, medium, and long term. These consequences include depressive disorders, anxiety disorders, post-traumatic stress disorder, sexual trauma symptoms, and addiction disorders related to substance use.
The study by El-Bassel et al. (1997) showed that sex workers, compared to a control sample, had higher scores on the subscales of obsessive–compulsive symptomatology, depression, anxiety, hostility, phobic anxiety, paranoid ideation, and psychoticism. To assess whether there was a direct relationship, the authors isolated other variables that could contribute to these higher values (differences in age, ethnicity, pregnancy, perceived risk of contracting HIV, rape, and substance use) and found a significant correlation between sex work and psychological stress.
In recent decades, the perception of mental health has changed significantly, especially among young people, who openly discuss depression, anxiety, and therapy. Mental health has become a recurring topic in popular culture, frequently featured in TV shows, movies, and songs, and has been the focus of numerous recently proposed and passed laws. This change is crucial to addressing the mental health of high-risk groups, such as people who sell sex. These individuals, often forced into this activity by survival, coercion, or deception, usually lack support networks and face economic precariousness, prior violence, and social marginalization, with a particular risk for LGBTQ+ and Black girls. Most who have sold sex started as minors, wanted to leave the sex trade, and suffered significant harm, as recounted by Esperanza Fonseca, a survivor who describes feelings of loneliness and deep sadness.
Prostitution can have profound and lasting psychological effects on those who engage in it. These effects can manifest in various disorders and symptoms that impact mental health and emotional well-being. Below is a detailed table exploring different psychological disorders associated with prostitution, describing their symptoms, reasons for occurrence, possible consequences, available treatments, severity, and prevalence among affected women.


=== Motivations for entering prostitution ===

The study titled "Prostituição: um estudo sobre as dimensões de sofrimento psíquico entre as profissionais e seu trabalho" investigates the psychological difficulties that sex workers face due to moral judgments and adverse working conditions. It is based on the psychodynamic approach to work, which defines normality as a precarious balance between work constraints and the psychological defenses workers develop to maintain their mental health. Prostitutes can preserve a psychological balance despite the constraints and moral judgments they face in contemporary society. One of the research questions was why women choose prostitution as a profession. The answers indicated that economic necessity is the most important factor. The workers mentioned the need to support their children and families as the main motivations for entering prostitution. Additionally, some compared their earnings in prostitution with previous jobs where they earned much less for longer and more difficult working hours.
Sex workers develop mechanisms to manage their clients' desires and tastes, demonstrating their capacity for conception within their profession. However, they set clear boundaries on what they are willing to do, regardless of payment, to preserve their integrity and mental health.
Most research points to financial and social problems as the main causes of prostitution. Factors such as lack of job opportunities, family conflicts, and urgent economic needs drive many women into this profession. However, while the patriarchal system and gender violence are realities, there are also women who choose this profession by their own desires and will. Prostitution is not homogeneous and encompasses a plurality of desires and expressions of sexuality.
Many women enter sex work through false promises of marriage or well-paid employment in another city. Once in sex work, perceived stigma and sexual abuse by law enforcement officers, who often are also clients, convince them that no external help is available. These extreme circumstances force women to focus on survival rather than escape, which is essentially the core of Stockholm syndrome: a psychological attempt to survive physically in captivity. This behavior pattern is not limited to prostitution in brothels, as similar relationships are present in street, home-based, and caste-based prostitution. This has been a point of difficulty for rehabilitation programs against trafficking worldwide.
The role of motherhood affects the decisions and behaviors of women trapped in these situations. Motherhood becomes not only a natural and biological role but also a source of vulnerability and emotional strength. From a psychological perspective, the fear of losing their children or being unable to care for them adequately due to their sexual exploitation is one of the most influential factors in these women's psyches. This fear can generate intense anxiety and chronic stress, which in turn perpetuates the cycle of exploitation. The constant threat of separation from their children can trigger submissive and compliant responses, as women may feel trapped and without options. Anxiety and fear of abandonment not only affect their emotional well-being but also limit their ability to make rational and strategic decisions to escape their situation.
The need to protect and support their children can conflict with their desire to escape and seek a better life. This cognitive dissonance can be debilitating, as women may feel constantly torn between two equally painful options. The maternal instinct to protect their children can also motivate some women to seek escape from exploitation. But this protective drive may be hindered by the lack of resources, support, and viable options. Uncertainty about the future and fear of violent reprisals can paralyze their ability to act. From a psychological perspective, this can generate a state of learned helplessness, where women believe they have no control over their situation and that any attempt to change it will be futile or dangerous.


=== Risk factors ===

Prostitution is primarily associated with poverty and, in most cases, is not a professional choice or vocation, but a way of monetizing the body due to lack of opportunities. It is directly related to social inequality and gender issues in the country. The main beneficiaries of this trade are pimps and those involved in managing trafficking and sex tourism.
Prostitution is often understood in the context of the traditional consumer risk model, where the consumed product is perceived as the agent carrying risks. However, in prostitution, the prostituted person is the "product" consumed, and it is they who are at greater risk, even though prostitution is sometimes erroneously described as "sex between consenting adults." Prostitution occurs because the prostituted person would not consent to sex with the buyer if they were not paid, which redefines the notion of consent and risk in this context. The traditional consumer risk model does not adequately apply to prostitution, where the prostituted person assumes significantly greater risks than the sex buyer or the pimp. A sex buyer interviewed explained that "being with a prostitute is like having a cup of coffee, when you finish, you throw it away." This perspective shows the dehumanization and objectification of prostituted individuals.
Prostitution is often the result of a combination of individual, social, and economic factors. Individuals who engage in prostitution do so due to a series of adverse circumstances that limit their options and increase their vulnerability to exploitation. Below is a list of risk factors that can contribute to a person falling into prostitution:

Poverty: The lack of economic resources is one of the main factors driving people to prostitution. The urgent need for money to cover basic necessities like food, housing, and medical care can lead to desperate decisions.
Lack of education: Limited educational opportunities restrict employment options, which in turn can push individuals toward prostitution as a way to earn money quickly.
Unemployment: The lack of employment or job instability can lead people to seek alternative means of income, including prostitution, especially in contexts where there are few formal job opportunities.
History of childhood sexual abuse: Sexual abuse during childhood is a common precursor to prostitution. Traumatic experiences can lead to vulnerability and the normalization of sexual exploitation in adulthood.
Domestic violence: Individuals who have been victims of domestic violence may turn to prostitution as a way to escape an abusive situation or to gain financial independence.
Lack of family and social support: The absence of a strong support network can leave individuals without emotional or financial resources, increasing their vulnerability to sexual exploitation.
Mental disorders: Mental health issues such as depression, anxiety, and post-traumatic stress disorder can make individuals more susceptible to exploitation in prostitution.
Previous experiences of exploitation: Individuals who have been trafficked or exploited for labor may be more vulnerable to falling into prostitution due to the continuation of the exploitation cycle.
Gender inequality: Discrimination and gender inequality can limit opportunities and increase women's vulnerability to sexual exploitation.
Displacement and migration: Displaced or migrant individuals, especially those without documentation, are particularly vulnerable to sexual exploitation due to their precarious situation and lack of legal protection.
Cultural and social factors: In some cultures and societies, social norms and expectations can contribute to sexual exploitation, either by stigmatizing victims or accepting prostitution as an economic solution.
Coercion and deception: Many individuals are forced or deceived into prostitution, either through human trafficking, false promises of employment, or direct coercion by pimps.

The risks associated with prostitution are numerous and well-documented. They include sexual harassment, rape and unprotected rape, domestic violence, physical assault, and psychological aftermaths such as post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), dissociative disorders, depression, eating disorders, suicide attempts, and substance abuse. The frequency of rape in prostitution results in extremely high rates of sexually transmitted infections, including HIV, with studies reporting an HIV prevalence of 93% in some prostituted populations. Family abuse and neglect often precede entry into prostitution. Physical, sexual, and emotional abuse during childhood is a common precursor, considered by many experts to be a necessary risk factor for prostitution. In one study, 70% of adult women in prostitution reported that childhood sexual abuse was responsible for their entry into prostitution. This abuse creates a cycle of victimization that impacts their futures and prepares them for exploitation in prostitution.

The fantasies of sex buyers drive the realities of prostituted individuals. Buyers seek to fulfill their fantasies through prostituted individuals, who must act according to the buyer's expectations. Failure to meet these expectations often leads to brutal violence. Objectification and dehumanization are intrinsic to prostitution, where prostituted individuals are seen as objects or products with economic value, facilitating their exploitation and abuse. Physical violence is a constant in prostitution. An occupational study noted that 99% of women in prostitution were victims of violence, with more frequent injuries than in occupations considered dangerous such as mining or firefighting. Poverty and duration in prostitution are associated with greater violence. In Vancouver, 75% of women in prostitution suffered physical injuries from violence, including fractures and head injuries.
The emotional effects of prostitution are devastating. Dissociation, a response to uncontrollable traumatic events, is common among prostituted individuals, similar to the response of tortured prisoners of war or sexually abused children. Dissociation is a necessary skill for surviving rape in prostitution, reflecting the dissociation needed to endure family sexual abuse. Dissociative disorders, depression, and other mood disorders are common among prostituted individuals in various settings. Prostitution and slavery share characteristics of dehumanization and objectification, resulting in a "social death." The prostituted individual is reduced to body parts and acts out the roles desired by buyers, suffering a systematic assault on their humanity. This objectification becomes internalized, causing profound changes in their self-perception and their relationships with others.
Sex buyers often understand the risks and consequences of prostitution but rationalize their behavior. Many acknowledge exploitation and economic coercion but continue to buy sex. Risk denial strategies, such as minimizing abuse or justifying payment, perpetuate exploitation.
Prostitution not only involves risks for prostituted individuals but also for buyers, who face legal risks, social stigma, and health risks. However, public attention often focuses more on the buyer's health than on the prostituted individual's, perpetuating the myth that prostituted individuals are vectors of disease. Public denial of prostitution risks is fueled by narratives from buyers and pimps that conceal violence and exploitation. This denial is similar to strategies used by the tobacco industry or climate change deniers, where harms are minimized, and exploitation is justified.
Government complicity sustains prostitution. The legalization and decriminalization of prostitution integrate this exploitation into the state economy, relieving governments of the responsibility to find employment for women. However, legalization does not eliminate the inherent risks of prostitution, as demonstrated by the recommendation for hostage negotiation training for those in legalized prostitution in Australia. Harm reduction approaches in prostitution, such as distributing condoms, do not address the root causes of the problem. Eliminating risk requires real survival options outside prostitution and a change in power structures that perpetuate exploitation. Survivor voices who have exited prostitution point toward obvious legal solutions. Sex buyers and pimps must be held accountable, and survival alternatives must be offered to prostituted individuals without criminalizing them. Several countries have adopted abolitionist approaches, penalizing sex buyers and providing exit services and job training for prostituted individuals.


=== Types of prostitutes ===

From a psychological perspective, prostitution presents a series of significant impacts that vary according to the type of sex work and the conditions under which it is carried out. Independent prostitutes, such as escorts and call girls, may experience lower levels of exploitation and have greater control over their working conditions, potentially mitigating some negative effects on their psychological well-being. However, those working under conditions of high exploitation and violence, such as street prostitutes or those held in debt bondage, face severe psychological consequences. These include post-traumatic stress disorder, depression, anxiety, and other mental health problems due to physical, sexual, and emotional violence they suffer. Debt bondage, in particular, is an extreme form of exploitation where women are kept in conditions of slavery due to unpayable debts, prevalent in underdeveloped countries. This situation subjects them to severe trauma and a constant threat of violence, exacerbating their psychological problems and making it difficult to escape this cycle of abuse and exploitation.
Street sex work, in particular, is associated with higher levels of stress and risk due to exposure to violence, third-party exploitation, and poor working conditions. Many street workers report experiences of physical and emotional abuse by both clients and pimps. This environment can lead to a higher incidence of mental health disorders, such as anxiety, depression, and post-traumatic stress disorder.
On the other hand, sex workers operating in more controlled environments, such as escort agencies or brothels, report higher levels of job satisfaction and self-esteem. These workers have more control over their working conditions, can select their clients, and generally experience less violence. This greater autonomy and control can translate into better mental health and a greater sense of empowerment.


==== High-end prostitutes ====

In 1958, the study of the psychology of high-end prostitutes revealed a series of common patterns and traumas that shaped their behavior and life choices. Many of these women came from difficult childhoods, marked by broken homes and dysfunctional family relationships, contributing to their sense of insecurity and low self-esteem. From an early age, they learned to see sex as a currency, a means to obtain the emotional contact and tangible rewards they craved.
These women, despite their superior intelligence and artistic abilities, felt emotionally adrift and lacked a clear concept of their feminine role. Their adult lives were marked by a constant search for validation and security, though paradoxically, they were trapped in a profession that perpetuated their feelings of worthlessness and anxiety. Most struggled with addiction problems and unstable relationships, unable to maintain solid friendships and resorting to psychological defenses such as projection and denial to cope with their reality.
Financial success and outward luxury failed to mask their deep emotional distress. Often, they feigned joy and affection toward their clients, but in their private lives, many were unable to experience sexual satisfaction and suffer from anxiety and depression. The high rates of suicide attempts among these women underscore the severity of their psychological suffering.
Psychotherapeutic treatment can offer relief and a way out of prostitution, helping these women confront and overcome their past traumas. Through therapy, some manage to establish healthier relationships and embark on new legitimate careers, finally finding a measure of stability and emotional peace.


== Coping mechanisms ==

Female sex workers suffer intense physical, sexual, and mental abuse, widely documented in medical and public health literature. However, the mental coping mechanisms employed by these women to survive have been less studied. In the debate on prostitution, women are often divided into two groups: those who were forced into prostitution and those who 'chose' this activity. The definition of 'force' or 'coercion' can vary, but the underlying logic remains: some women are compelled to prostitute themselves through violence or economic coercion and thus deserve compassion. On the other hand, there are those who seemingly choose it freely, even though they may have other options available, such as access to social services and unemployment benefits.
The reality, however, is more complex. Women from all social classes may find themselves in prostitution due to experiences of sexual, physical, or emotional abuse and may be reenacting these traumas within the realm of prostitution. Rachel Moran argues that prostitution is not only a consequence of women's lack of economic power but exists primarily due to male demand. Prostitution is also seen as a reenactment of previous traumas. Andrea Dworkin mentioned that incest is the training ground for prostitution, indicating that experiences of childhood abuse can predispose women to prostitution. Huschke Mau adds that traumatic situations can become addictive due to the release of adrenaline, a familiar experience for those who have faced violence from a young age.
The sociologist Pierre Bourdieu suggests that the body serves as a means of memory for any social order, unconsciously internalizing the structures of social inequality or sexual hierarchies. This means that experiences of violence and degradation become integrated into one's self-perception, profoundly affecting self-esteem and self-worth. Prostituted women often internalize violence and develop dissociative mechanisms to cope with the reality of their situation. Forcing themselves to feel enjoyment during sexual acts is a common strategy to protect themselves psychologically and to meet the expectations of clients, who often need to believe that the women enjoy the sexual interaction to soothe any guilt about their actions. Prostitution also plays a role in maintaining the second-class status of all women within the gender hierarchy. Michael Meuser describes how spaces reserved exclusively for men allow them to reinforce their dominance and normalize social dynamics that perpetuate male supremacy. Therefore, the existence of prostitution has adverse effects not only on prostituted women but on all women in society.
Leaving prostitution is a long and complex process that involves not only finding a new source of income but also readjusting to daily life outside the sex trade. Women who manage to exit prostitution often face significant challenges in rebuilding their self-esteem and social integration.


=== Depersonalization ===

Dissociation is a psychological process in which a person disconnects from their thoughts, feelings, memories, or identity. This phenomenon is especially prevalent in individuals who have experienced severe traumas, such as childhood sexual abuse. Dissociation can manifest in various ways, from amnesia to the creation of multiple identities, known as multiple personality disorder (MPD).
Dissociative identity disorder (DID), formerly known as Multiple Personality Disorder, is a condition often misunderstood and sensationalized in the media. However, various studies have revealed that between 1 and 3% of the general population meet the diagnostic criteria for DID.
Various studies have investigated the relationship between child sexual abuse and dissociative disorders. The disorder most commonly associated with childhood sexual abuse is multiple personality disorder. In a study by Colin A. Ross and colleagues, 236 people with MPD were examined, and a high prevalence of childhood sexual abuse and dissociation was found. This study also highlighted that, in addition to MPD, prostitution and work in the adult entertainment industry (exotic dancers) showed a significant incidence of dissociative experiences.
To assess the prevalence of dissociation and childhood sexual abuse, tools such as the Dissociative Disorders Interview Schedule (DDIS) and the Dissociative Experiences Scale (DES) were used. These instruments help identify and measure the frequency and severity of dissociative symptoms. In the mentioned study, 60 subjects were included, divided into three groups: 20 patients diagnosed with MPD, 20 sex workers (prostitutes), and 20 exotic dancers. The results showed that most subjects with MPD met the DSM-III-R criteria for the diagnosis of this disorder, and dissociation was common in all three categories of subjects studied.


==== Causes ====
One of the most common causes of DID is childhood sexual abuse. When a child experiences a stressful event such as sexual abuse, the fight or flight response is activated. Dissociation is a form of psychological escape when the child cannot physically escape. The child may imagine that the abuse is happening to another person or another "part" of themselves. If the abuse is severe and prolonged, this "part" can develop its own identity, separate from the child's conscious memory.
Survivors of trauma may exhibit symptoms instead of memories. Many people with DID report memories of childhood traumas and evident symptoms such as "waking up" in unfamiliar places or meeting people who call them by another name. However, it is common for some individuals not to remember their childhood traumas, but to exhibit more subtle and difficult-to-recognize symptoms of PTSD and DID. These symptoms include inexplicable feelings of guilt, shame, and worthlessness, emotional numbness, concentration problems, thought insertion, Depersonalization and Derealization. Without known traumatic memories to attribute these symptoms to, the person is often misdiagnosed and only superficial problems are treated, masking their true needs.
Many trafficking victims have histories of child sexual abuse, a primary cause of PTSD and DID. Additionally, studies have shown that women in prostitution experience PTSD levels comparable to those of combat veterans. It has also been found that 35% of prostituted individuals and 80% of exotic dancers experience dissociative disorders, and between 5% and 18% of prostituted individuals and 35% of exotic dancers meet the diagnostic criteria for DID.


=== Religion ===
 Women in prostitution often turn to different religious traditions to address their situation, though with very different approaches. For some, religion presents an escape route, offering spiritual redemption and a fresh start. Some Pentecostal churches in Brazil have provided emotional and community support, encouraging women to leave prostitution through conversion, abandoning sinful behaviors, and integrating into a community that values their new moral identity.
In contrast, Afro-Brazilian religions such as Umbanda and Candomblé provide tools to improve their economic success within prostitution. Through rituals and offerings to entities like Pombagira, these women seek to attract more clients and increase their income. These practices reflect a pragmatic and materialistic relationship with the divine, based on the belief that spiritual entities can grant favors and material success in exchange for specific offerings.


==== Umbanda ====
Erika Bourguignon explored dissociative phenomena in different cultural contexts. In her research, Bourguignon compared dissociative cases, such as a woman in New York and a man in São Paulo, showing how dissociation manifests in culturally specific ways. In the context of Umbanda, an Afro-Brazilian religion, dissociative states are interpreted as spiritual possession, where the individual acts as a medium for ancestral spirits. These experiences are not seen as pathologies but as mediumistic abilities that require development and acceptance within the religious community. For prostitutes, dissociation can be a necessary strategy to manage the dissonance between their personal identity and the demands of their work. This mental separation allows them to perform sexual acts without involving their true selves, creating a psychological barrier that protects their mental health. These dissociative experiences enable the individual to face stressful situations without being completely overwhelmed by them.
Bernstein and Putnam propose a continuum for dissociation in the psychopathological dimension, suggesting that not all dissociative experiences are inherently pathological. This perspective is useful for understanding how prostitutes use dissociation as a tool to survive emotionally and psychologically in a hostile environment. In practice, prostitutes may experience a variety of dissociative states, from feeling like external observers of their own bodies to adopting alternative identities that handle interactions with clients. These identities can act as a form of self-protection, allowing women to fulfill their work without feeling the direct emotional impact.


===== Pombagira =====
In Brazil, many women in prostitution turn to spiritual and mystical practices to increase their income. These women frequent spiritist houses and candomblé or umbanda terreiros, where they are advised to buy herbs for baths and products for offerings to spiritual entities like the Lady of the Night or Pombagira. The belief is that these rituals will attract more clients and, therefore, generate higher income. For each entity, the offerings vary and include drinks, perfumes, and red objects. Although some women express skepticism towards these beliefs, many attribute financial success to their participation in these rituals. It is noted that older women often have more economic success than their younger counterparts, attributed to their involvement in these spiritual practices.
The cost of these rituals can be significant. Some women report spending large sums of money on products for offerings, with the promise of obtaining greater profits. However, there is a mixed perception of the effectiveness of these rituals, as although they may attract more clients, the associated cost of offerings may not be compensatory.

Pombagira is a central figure in these spiritual practices, seen as a powerful entity capable of performing "miracles" and attracting success in love, relationships, and material progress. This entity is associated with manipulating sensuality and sexuality and is believed to remove obstacles and enemies to ensure the success of her devotees. The beliefs surrounding Pombagira are not limited to prostitution. In the Brazilian social imagination, Pombagira represents the archetype of the ritual prostitute and is commonly requested to perform works on romantic relationships. Although not all Pombagiras are considered prostitutes, the connection with prostitution is due to her representation as a free and powerful woman. Women in prostitution who participate in these spiritual practices do so under the principle of reciprocity. They offer objects and perform rituals in exchange for economic favors and success in their profession. This system of exchange reflects similar practices in popular Catholicism, where people make promises to saints in exchange for divine favors. However, in prostitution, these offerings are primarily aimed at improving sexual attraction and financial success.
The article "A Pomba-Gira in the Imagination of Prostitutes," published in the journal "Man, Time, and Space," examines the relationship between prostitutes and Pomba-Gira, an entity from the Umbanda pantheon known for her free manifestation of female genital power. This study, conducted by Francisco Gleidson Vieira dos Santos and Simone Simões Ferreira Soares, delves into the symbolic and psychological importance of Pomba-Gira in the lives of prostitutes. Pomba-Gira represents a powerful archetype in Umbanda, characterized by attributes associated with sexuality, disobedience, and the transgression of social norms. From a deep psychological perspective, this entity can be interpreted as a projection of the collective unconscious of prostitutes, who find in her a figure of empowerment and resistance. Identifying with Pomba-Gira allows prostitutes to negotiate their self-esteem and sense of agency in a social context that stigmatizes and marginalizes them.
In psychological terms, the figure of Pomba-Gira could be seen as a manifestation of a dissociative personality in prostitutes, emerging as a defense mechanism against the adversity of their environment. Dissociation is a psychological process by which a person can divide their identity into different states or personalities to face difficult or traumatic situations. In this case, Pomba-Gira would serve as an alternative personality, allowing prostitutes to perform their work more bearably and with less emotional pain. Pomba-Gira, with her defiant character and celebration of free sexuality, offers an alternative narrative to the guilt and shame commonly associated with prostitution. This identification with a powerful and transgressive entity can help prostitutes reconnect with repressed aspects of their identity and find a sense of dignity and worth in a sacred context. By incorporating Pomba-Gira during rituals, prostitutes can experience a form of catharsis, temporarily freeing themselves from the emotional burdens of their daily reality.
Monique Augras, cited in the study, suggests that Pomba-Gira is a Brazilian creation that emerged from the destitution of the sexual characteristics of Iemanjá, another Umbanda figure syncretized with the Immaculate Conception. This new entity channels the most scandalous aspects of female sexuality, directly confronting patriarchal values. From a Jungian point of view, Pomba-Gira could be seen as a manifestation of the anima, representing the erotic and autonomous dimension of the female unconscious that challenges the restrictions imposed by patriarchal society. Interviews with "fathers-of-saint" and other Umbanda practitioners reveal that Pombas-Giras are considered complex and powerful figures, revered for their ability to influence matters of love and desire. This reverence is reflected in ritual practices, where Pombas-Giras, when incorporated by mediums, act as agents of transformation and empowerment. This allows prostitutes to assert their value and dignity in a sacred context.


=== Positive identity ===

One of the fundamental principles of social identity theory is that individuals seek to enhance their self-esteem through their social identities, and an important component of self-definition is occupational identity. Individuals employed as prostitutes constantly engage in various ideological techniques to neutralize the negative connotations associated with the work they do. Ashforth and Kreiner identified three of these techniques: restructuring, recalibration, and refocusing, which are used at the group level to transform the meaning of stigmatized work. Restructuring allows prostitutes to transform stigma into a symbol of honor by asserting that they provide an educational and therapeutic service rather than selling their bodies.
These protective techniques enhance the self-definition of prostitutes and can be considered coping mechanisms. However, engaging in these techniques requires mental and emotional energy, which can become a stressor. Additionally, the requirement for a strong group culture to support these ideological techniques is not always present for prostitutes. Even with efforts to adopt these techniques, most members of occupations considered "dirty work" maintain some ambivalence about their jobs, as they remain part of a broader society that stigmatizes their labor as "dirty" and have continuous contact with people outside their occupation. Prostitutes also have to construct their self-identity in circumstances that put pressure on the relationship between their professional and personal lives. The bodies of prostitutes, and potentially their psyches, are consumed by the client in the act of commercial sex, creating additional pressure to maintain a division between the professional and the personal. Many of the techniques that prostitutes use to maintain this division are considered coping mechanisms.


=== Emotional labor in prostitution ===
Emotional labor is defined as the "act of displaying organizationally desired emotions during service transactions." Emotional labor is believed to be more prevalent in service occupations, as people working in services are generally subject to stricter norms about the appropriate expression of emotions in certain situations. In particular, what is disturbing for people is the imbalance or dissonance between what the worker feels and the emotions they must display. This discrepancy between felt and expressed emotions has a negative effect on physical health.
Prostitutes face very different demands compared to the general population regarding the emotional labor required. Their work consists of acts that are intensely personal and intimate. They must fake affection and emotion to develop a regular clientele. One way that prostitutes cope with the emotional demands imposed on them is by "categorizing different types of sexual encounters [as] relational, professional, or recreational." This way, they can maintain distance from the encounter with the client and preserve their self-identity. The literature also suggests that prostitutes maintain emotional distance by using condoms at work or during professional sex and by refusing to kiss clients. Kissing "is rejected because it is too similar to the kind of behavior one would engage in with a non-commercial partner; it implies too much genuine desire and love for the other person."


=== Use of stimulation and pleasure ===
Pleasure and pain are more related than they seem. Under certain circumstances, pain can intensify sensations of pleasure due to the release of endorphins and other chemicals in the brain. This mechanism is similar to the "runner's high" that athletes experience after an intense exercise session. The relationship between pleasure and pain in the human brain is intricate. They share similar neuronal pathways, allowing the brain to modulate pleasurable experiences to counteract pain. This neurochemical capability can explain how some sex workers find pleasure in their interactions, using it as a way to dissociate from the physical and emotional pain that often accompanies their work. The release of neurotransmitters such as endorphins during these moments can provide temporary relief and a sense of well-being.
Prostitution involves practices aimed at minimizing physical issues, although these same practices can generate psychological complications. Sex workers use stimulation and pleasure to reduce physical pain, which, paradoxically, can lead to significant emotional disconnection.
Some clients seek not only to receive pleasure but also to provide pleasure to the worker. For example, a client may pay to give a massage and provide sexual pleasure, which can result in a gratifying experience for both. This type of interaction can go beyond the negative stereotypes associated with sex work, showing that it does not always involve exploitation or abuse. A study by Elizabeth Megan Smith of La Trobe University, published in the journal Sexualities, investigated how sex workers integrate pleasure into their work. This study, titled "'It gets very intimate for me': Discursive boundaries of pleasure and performance in sex work," involved nine women from the sex industry in Victoria, Australia. Through narratives and photographs, the participants explored their relationship with intimacy, performance, and pleasure. The study shows that sex workers often experience pleasure during their work to achieve better vaginal lubrication, reducing the risk of tears and other physical injuries. However, this pursuit of pleasure is not inherently positive.
Some sex workers emphasize the importance of focusing on their own pleasure to maintain a sexual experience and avoid resentment towards clients and the work itself. The ability to reach orgasm can be a strategy to preserve personal integrity. For many, forcing oneself to feel pleasure in unwanted situations can be a survival strategy to avoid physical pain but comes at a high psychological cost. Sex workers may experience a diminished ability to form genuine emotional connections outside of work, leading to feelings of isolation and difficulties in their personal relationships.


=== Stockholm syndrome ===

Stockholm syndrome, a phenomenon where victims develop bonds with their captors as a survival strategy, has been mentioned in the media in relation to this vulnerable population, but it has not been formally investigated. The four main criteria of Stockholm syndrome (perceived threat to survival, displays of kindness by the captor, isolation from other perspectives, perception of inability to escape) have been identified in the narrative accounts of these women.
The threat can be explicit, like physical violence, or more subtle, like emotional abuse or the threat of harm. Victims may believe they cannot survive without the abuser's protection and support and may feel responsible for the safety of others, such as their families. The perception of kindness, even in the smallest form, can be disproportionate due to the victim's low self-esteem. These victims may interpret any cessation of violence or minimal gesture as an act of kindness and may downplay their situation with thoughts like "at least he didn't..." or "it could have been worse".
The first criterion of Stockholm syndrome is the perception of a threat to survival and the belief that the captor would carry out that threat. Many trafficked women experience physical violence and torture, perpetrated by brothel workers (pimps, traffickers, madams) as well as clients. The second condition is the captor's display of love or kindness. Many women maintain relationships with their traffickers or develop bonds with clients, often hoping to start a family with them. This "act of kindness" can be any action that helps the woman survive, as her survival is essential for the functioning of the sex market. The third condition is isolation from the outside world. Many women described their first months in the brothel as completely isolated, contributing to Depersonalization and demoralization. The fourth condition is the perception of inability to escape. Sex workers who attempted to escape were publicly beaten to deter others from trying.
Rescued sex workers refuse to testify against their traffickers, a behavior observed in countries like the United States, England, and India. The closest psychiatric diagnoses to the traumas suffered by these women are complex post-traumatic stress disorder (CPTSD) and disorders of extreme stress not otherwise specified (DESNOS), but these are not included in the DSM IV due to debates about their distinction from post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Stockholm syndrome could be an additional explanation for this behavior, as the conditions described for this syndrome are present in the accounts of sex workers.


=== Addictions ===
The relationship between prostitution and addiction is a complex phenomenon involving multiple psychological, social, and economic factors. Many individuals involved in prostitution may have experienced significant traumas in their lives, such as physical, emotional, or sexual abuse during childhood. These traumas often contribute to mental health issues like post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), depression, and anxiety, which can predispose a person to develop addictions as a coping mechanism. Individuals involved in prostitution and struggling with addictions often experience a range of negative psychological effects. Shame, guilt, and low self-esteem are common, exacerbated by social stigma and negative self-perception. Addiction, in turn, can lead to further social alienation and isolation, reinforcing these negative feelings and contributing to the persistence of addictive behavior.


==== Emotional and sexual addiction ====

Involvement in prostitution is not always driven solely by economic reasons. Psychological and emotional factors play a significant role. Some individuals in sex work may experience addictions related to seeking validation, the need to control trauma, or as a way to cope with stress and anxiety. Childhood trauma and prolonged stress can alter brain responses, increasing susceptibility to addictive behaviors, not necessarily related to substances but to activities that generate a sense of reward, such as commercial sex. Some women in prostitution find this activity a way to exert power and control, especially if they have suffered traumas or seek to regain a sense of agency in their lives. This control can be a way to manage their self-esteem and feel validated through men's attention and desire. Additionally, some seek prostitution as a form of emotional independence and autonomy from adverse personal situations.
Some studies highlight that not all individuals in sex work are there due to extreme economic need; some choose this profession for the exploration of their sexuality and the financial independence it offers. For some, prostitution offers a temporary escape from personal problems and a sense of empowerment, despite significant risks to their physical and emotional well-being.

This addiction is not always driven solely by the desire for money but also by the need for validation and power over their clients. Compulsive sexual behavior can cause changes in brain circuits, leading individuals to seek more intense sexual encounters to achieve the same satisfaction, similar to other addictions such as drugs or alcohol. Additionally, prostitutes can be influenced and develop addictive behaviors due to constant interaction with clients who have sexual addictions. Repeated exposure to these compulsive behaviors can contribute to sex workers developing similar addictions, either seeking emotional validation or feeling a compulsive need to engage in sexual activities to gain a sense of control and power. Besides sex and the need for validation, prostitutes can also develop addictions to behaviors such as gambling, compulsive shopping, excessive exercise, and social media use. These behavioral addictions are similar to substance addictions in how they affect the brain and can lead to financial, health, and personal relationship problems. However, prostitution is rarely a completely free choice when options are limited, and socio-economic conditions are adverse.


==== Addiction to cosmetic surgeries ====

Sex workers often resort to cosmetic procedures to enhance their appearance, hoping to increase their attractiveness and, consequently, their income. This trend is especially notable in countries like Colombia, where the cosmetic surgery industry is booming.
Prostitutes may undergo multiple surgeries to achieve an ideal of beauty influenced by cultural norms and client demands. This pursuit of physical perfection can become an addiction similar to other behavioral addictions, where individuals continuously seek surgical procedures despite potential negative risks. This addictive behavior is often related to psychological disorders such as body dysmorphic disorder (BDD), a mental condition where individuals are excessively concerned about perceived defects in their appearance.


==== Substance abuse ====

People engaged in prostitution are predominantly women, although men are also involved. There are various types of prostitution, from high-end escort services to street-level services. In the United States, prostitution is illegal except in some counties in Nevada. Women in street prostitution often face greater social and legal consequences, including high rates of arrest, incarceration, violence, and victimization, as well as health, mental health, and substance abuse issues.

Substance abuse is common among women in prostitution, including the use of heroin, cocaine, marijuana, and alcohol. Some women start prostituting to fund their drug use, while others develop substance abuse problems after becoming involved in prostitution. Substance use can provide women with a coping mechanism for the difficulties of prostitution. Most women in prostitution have experienced violent events throughout their lives, often from childhood. There is a high prevalence of childhood sexual abuse among women in prostitution, and many also face violence in their intimate relationships and within the context of prostitution. These experiences of violence and trauma throughout life place women at risk of developing disorders such as post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), anxiety, depression, and other related issues.
The high levels of substance abuse and trauma among women in prostitution suggest the need for programs that address both issues comprehensively. This study aims to inform the implementation of the SPD and highlight the importance of developing and implementing effective interventions for this population.


=== Recidivism ===
For some, dissatisfaction and increasing emotional distress prompted periods of disengagement from sex work, ranging from days to years, or the beginning of what they described as their exit from sex work. However, for most, these breaks were short-lived, and emotional and financial difficulties led them back. Emotional and financial difficulties were frequently interconnected, as drug addiction as a means of emotional management created economic problems. Participants struggled with limited monetary benefits and faced significant barriers to accessing alternative employment and educational opportunities. Women reported few options for earning quick money, making them return to sex work as an immediate solution to urgent financial needs. Despite not necessarily wanting to return, sex work was seen as an easy way out in situations of extreme economic need. Even those who tried to leave sex work found it difficult to refuse face-to-face propositions or calls from regular clients. Once experienced in sex work, alternative options seemed scarce, and sex work offered a level of familiarity and flexibility. Additionally, for some, it was important to avoid the time restrictions and obligations associated with formal employment, preferring to avoid the legal implications of criminal activities such as theft. Substance use often drove the need to earn quick money with few obligations, although some women described how sex work met basic needs and then became accustomed to the extra money. In addition to financial appeal, some participants were drawn back to sex work seeking companionship, purpose, and relief from loneliness and boredom. Returning to sex work offered a sense of belonging, especially for those with limited family contacts or loss of custody of their children due to drug problems. Although some women accessed activities in support services, they reported a limited range of self-directed leisure activities, sometimes leading them back to sex work due to boredom.


== Psychological consequences ==


=== Post-traumatic stress disorder ===

One of the strongest psychological effects of prostitution on sex workers is post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). PTSD is described as episodes of anxiety, depression, insomnia, irritability, recurrent memories, emotional numbness, and hypervigilance. PTSD symptoms are more severe and long-lasting when the stressor is a person. According to Melissa Farley, "PTSD is normative among prostituted women." In San Francisco, Farley conducted a study with 130 prostitutes, 55% of whom reported being sexually assaulted in childhood and 49% reported being physically assaulted in childhood. As adults in prostitution: 82% had been physically assaulted, 83% had been threatened with a weapon, 68% had been raped while working as prostitutes, and 84% reported being homeless at some point. According to the 130 people interviewed, 68% met the DSM III-R criteria for a PTSD diagnosis. Farley notes that 73% of the 473 people interviewed in five different countries (South Africa, Thailand, Turkey, US, and Zambia) reported being assaulted in prostitution and 62% had been raped in prostitution. Any prostitute who experiences trauma can develop PTSD. Research found that of the 500 prostitutes interviewed worldwide, 67% suffer from PTSD.

I have experienced horrible, disgusting, and traumatizing things that no person should ever endure. I have had men force me to perform sexual acts... They violently sodomized me, strangled me, photographed and filmed me having sex without my knowledge or consent, and some men used me so forcefully that my genitals and anus were torn and bleeding. I have had men so obsessed that they contacted me hundreds of times a day, followed me home, and randomly showed up knocking on my door in the middle of the night. I have been raped numerous times without a condom.
The study titled "Prostitution in Five Countries: Violence and Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder" conducted by Melissa Farley, Isin Baral, Merab Kiremire, and Ufuk Sezgin and published in Feminism & Psychology in 1998 investigates the prevalence of violence and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) among prostituted individuals in South Africa, Thailand, Turkey, the United States, and Zambia. The research, based on interviews with 475 individuals in prostitution, shows that 73% of respondents reported being physically assaulted, 62% reported being raped, and 67% met the diagnostic criteria for PTSD. The study also examines differences in experiences of violence by location of prostitution (street or brothel) and race, although it found no significant variations in the severity of PTSD among different groups. The data indicate that prostitution inherently carries a high risk of violence and psychological trauma, regardless of the cultural or legal context. Additionally, an average of 92% of respondents expressed a desire to leave prostitution, needing support such as job training, healthcare, and physical protection. The research demonstrates that prostitution is a form of violence against women and raises serious implications for public policies and support programs aimed at individuals in prostitution.

The table provides a detailed comparison between sex workers with current PTSD and those without current PTSD, focusing on several key dimensions: demographics, drug use, risky sexual behaviors, and mental health and trauma experiences.
In terms of demographics, the mean age of women with current PTSD is 34 years, similar to women without current PTSD, who have a mean age of 33 years. Both cohorts have a median of 9 years of schooling. However, a notable difference is the rate of homelessness in the past 12 months, which is 50% among women with current PTSD, compared to 42% in women without current PTSD. Additionally, A&TSI (Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander) status is more prevalent among women with current PTSD (27% vs. 20%).
Regarding recreational drug use, the median age at first use of injectable drugs is slightly lower in women with current PTSD (17 years) compared to those without current PTSD (18 years). The rates of heroin dependence are high in both cohorts, though slightly lower in women with current PTSD (73% vs. 86%). Dependence on cocaine and cannabis is also relevant, with similar percentages between both groups. However, a significant finding is that 20% of women with current PTSD shared injection equipment in the last month, compared to 40% of those without current PTSD, suggesting possible differences in risk behaviors related to drug use.
In terms of risky sexual behaviors, the median age at starting sex work is slightly higher in women with current PTSD (20 years) compared to those without current PTSD (18 years). The prevalence of condom use is high in both groups, both during sex with clients (91% for current PTSD and 83% for no current PTSD) and during oral sex with clients (62% for current PTSD and 60% for no current PTSD). This indicates a high level of awareness about protection in both groups.
The most pronounced differences are observed in variables related to mental health and trauma. Women with current PTSD report a significantly higher median number of traumas (7 traumas) compared to those without current PTSD (5 traumas). Severe depressive symptoms are more common in women with current PTSD (73% vs. 48%), as are suicide attempts (50% vs. 40%). Both groups have similar rates of physical assault while working (77% in both cases) and childhood sexual abuse (82% in current PTSD vs. 72% in no current PTSD). However, childhood neglect is significantly more reported by women with current PTSD (59% vs. 28%), and adult sexual assault is also notably higher in this group (82% vs. 53%). The median age at first sexual assault is slightly lower in the group with current PTSD (13 years) compared to the group without current PTSD (14 years).


==== Analysis ====
This analysis suggests that sex workers with current PTSD not only face a higher burden of trauma and adverse conditions throughout their lives but also exhibit more severe patterns of risky behavior and mental health consequences. The high prevalence of multiple traumas, severe depression, and experiences of violence in both childhood and adulthood demonstrates the need for targeted interventions and trauma-focused treatments for this vulnerable group. The lower rate of sharing injection equipment among the group with current PTSD could indicate greater caution in certain health risk aspects, but this does not mitigate the need for comprehensive support due to the severity of mental health issues and traumatic experiences they face.


==== Symptoms ====
The study conducted by Young-Eun Jung and colleagues compared mental symptoms, especially PTSD symptoms, in women who escaped prostitution, activists helping in shelters, and a control group. The research evaluated 113 ex-prostitutes living in shelters, 81 activists, and 65 control subjects using self-report questionnaires on demographic data, trauma-related symptoms and PTSD, stress reactions, and other mental health factors. The results showed that ex-prostitutes exhibited more frequent and severe responses to stress, somatization, depression, fatigue, frustration, sleep problems, smoking, and alcoholism, as well as more frequent and severe PTSD symptoms compared to the other two groups. Activists also showed higher tension, sleep problems, smoking, and more frequent and severe PTSD symptoms than the control group. These findings suggest that involvement in prostitution may increase the risks of exposure to violence, psychologically traumatizing not only the prostitutes themselves but also those who help them. Moreover, the effects of trauma can persist for a long time. Future research is needed to develop methods to assess specific factors contributing to vicarious trauma in prostitution and to protect field workers from this trauma.


=== Borderline personality disorder ===

Borderline personality disorder (BPD) is a mental disorder characterized by significant impulsivity, seduction, and excessive sexuality. Sexual promiscuity, sexual obsessions, and hypersexuality or sexual addiction are common in both men and women with BPD. Research indicates that more than 90% of sex addicts exhibit personality disorder traits and often suffer from other psychological issues. BPD is one of the most prevalent personality disorders among those with hypersexuality. A person with BPD may engage in impulsive and self-destructive behaviors, including sexual activity as a form of self-harm. In this context, many individuals with BPD and hypersexual behaviors may be drawn to prostitution as a way to meet their emotional and psychological needs. Prostitution may be seen as an outlet for impulsivity and the need for emotional validation, offering a sense of control and worth that individuals with BPD may desperately seek. Additionally, the financial instability often associated with BPD may drive these individuals to prostitution as a means of economic support. Participation in prostitution can, in turn, exacerbate BPD symptoms due to exposure to abuse, violence, and social stigma, creating a harmful cycle that further hinders treatment and recovery. Jane Eloy, a sex worker, provides a raw perspective on how the search for validation and instant gratification can be driven by emotional deficiencies and a need for recognition. From a psychological standpoint, the behavior of participants shows power dynamics and cognitive dissonance, where unmet expectations generate tension that is resolved by conforming to group rules. This allows for the exploration of repressed sexual identities and power roles, using transgression and control as means to fulfill subconscious desires and resolve deep-seated insecurities.

I had a sexual encounter with him and he ejaculated in five minutes. I was frustrated because I wanted to have an orgasm with him. I went upstairs to play a card game with friends at Paul's house. The winner would win money, and the loser would have to perform a punishment. The punishment would be that the man ejaculates, and the woman would have to do a striptease or live sex. I lost and had to have sex in front of everyone, while the others participated in the game and chose the positions. "Put her on all fours, touch her clitoris." My luck was that the man in question was a beautiful 1.85m tall black man with a huge and wonderful penis. I was happy because I managed to have an orgasm.
The prevalence of survival sex and mental illnesses are overrepresented in homeless populations. A recent study evaluated the relationship between borderline personality disorder (BPD) symptoms and participation in survival sex among homeless women. Researchers surveyed 158 homeless women about self-reported BPD symptomatology and sexual history. Bivariate and multivariate analyses in this study revealed that certain BPD symptoms are strongly correlated with survival sex among adult homeless women. The results indicate that impulsivity is a significant factor associated with participation in survival sex, even after controlling for other demographic and homelessness experience variables. These findings suggest the need for service agencies and others working with at-risk female populations to consider impulsivity as a critical factor when developing interventions to prevent survival sex. The study sample included women from Omaha, Nebraska; Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; and Portland, Oregon, and interviews were conducted in shelters, community meal programs, and outdoor locations. Participants received $20 for completing the interviews. The results showed that 23.8% of the women surveyed had engaged in survival sex, and BPD dimensions such as impulsivity and fear of abandonment were significantly related to this practice. Age was also identified as a risk factor, with a higher likelihood of engaging in survival sex as women aged. The results highlight the need for training for service providers working with homeless populations, particularly to identify and support older women with high levels of impulsivity. This study underscores the importance of continuing to investigate the relationship between BPD and survival sex to develop more effective interventions.


=== Self-destructive behaviors ===
Self-destructive behavior in female sex workers refers to actions that endanger their own safety and physical health, considered a form of self-destruction. This phenomenon manifests through high levels of suicidal ideation and suicide attempts, primarily motivated by emotions such as shame, anger, and resentment. Among sex workers, it is common to find underdeveloped psychological protection mechanisms, contributing to maintaining risky sexual behaviors. These mechanisms include primitive forms of psychological defense, such as denial and projection. Additionally, there is a significant propensity toward active victim behaviors, characterized by a tendency to take risks and adopt a passive or provocative attitude in dangerous situations.
The analysis of the psychological and behavioral patterns of these women has identified three main variants: the emotional-anxious-dysthymic, the exalted affective-hyperthymic-cyclothymic, and the demonstrative-excitative-stubborn. The first is characterized by high emotional lability, a pessimistic perception of reality, and low self-esteem. The second variant shows turbulent behavior with unstable emotional responses and a constant search for entertainment and pleasure. The third variant is distinguished by egocentrism, irritability, and a tendency towards conflict due to a lack of acceptance of other opinions.
In terms of general and sexual education, it has been found that many sex workers lack adequate training, contributing to a disharmonious personality and a lack of adaptability. This educational deficit includes both the absence of sex education in the family environment and exposure to immoral or repressive types of education.
Women who engage in prostitution on the street face numerous problems that can increase their risk of having suicidal thoughts. Factors such as violence, substance abuse, mental health issues, and lack of social support are common in their lives and significantly contribute to this risk. Street prostitutes often live in difficult and dangerous conditions. Many have been victims of physical, emotional, or sexual violence. A study conducted in several European cities revealed that approximately 60% of street prostitutes have experienced some form of violence in the past year, and 42% report having had suicidal thoughts during the same period. Additionally, it was found that 35% of these women suffer from clinical depression, and 25% have attempted suicide at least once in their lives.
A study conducted by Alexandre Teixeira from the Faculty of Psychology at the University of Porto concluded that 44% of women who engage in street prostitution have had at least one suicidal episode, identifying precariousness, lack of legislation, and exposure to violence as the main risk factors. The research, which included 52 street prostitutes aged 18 to 60, revealed that the lack of income is the primary reason why these women turn to prostitution, although they recognize that this activity is insufficient for their sustenance. Teixeira noted that 23 of the women studied had attempted suicide one or more times, attributing this high rate of suicide attempts to causes such as victimization and exposure to verbal, physical, and sexual violence from clients and peers. He also highlighted that legal regulation of prostitution, with rights to social protection and the possibility of making contributions to social security, could positively influence these women's emotional health. According to the researcher, approximately 70% of the participants have been in prostitution for five or more years, which allows it to be considered a career rather than a temporary activity, although the women themselves do not usually perceive it this way, referring to prostitution as a temporary solution to immediate problems.


=== Self-harm and suicide ===

The diathesis-stress theory of suicide suggests that a biological predisposition (diathesis) combined with negative life circumstances (stress) precipitates suicidal behaviors. Women engaged in sex work and who use drugs face multiple risk factors for suicidal ideation and attempts, including childhood adversities, high levels of physical and sexual violence, and social stigmatization. Violence and substance use can have an interdependent relationship, where intimate partner violence can increase alcohol and drug consumption, and vice versa. Stigma and discrimination, especially related to sex work and drug use, increase the risk of suicide by generating social isolation and feelings of internal shame.
The study "Increased burden of suicidality among young street-involved sex workers who use drugs in Vancouver, Canada" investigated the risk of suicide attempts among young people living on the street and engaged in sex work in Vancouver, Canada. Data were obtained from the At-Risk Youth Study, a prospective cohort of street youth who use drugs. Multivariable generalized estimating equation analyses were used to determine if these youth had an elevated risk of attempting suicide, controlling for possible confounding factors. Between September 2005 and May 2015, 1210 youth were recruited, of whom 173 (14.3%) reported having recently attempted suicide. In the multivariable analysis, youth engaged in sex work were more likely to report recent suicide attempts. Systematic discrimination and unaddressed trauma were found to contribute to the increased risk of suicide in this population.


==== Anna's suicide and prostitution in London ====
In 2009, a Chinese woman named Anna committed suicide near Heathrow Airport in London. Friends later discovered that she worked as a prostitute in an illegal massage parlor. Jenny Lu, an art student from Taiwan and Anna's friend, investigated her friend's secret life, resulting in her first feature film, "The Receptionist." The film, which premiered in Taiwan in 2017, has yet to have a release date in Brazil. Anna, originally from a small town in China, moved to London in search of a better life but ended up leading a double life unknown to those close to her. Lu contacted women who worked with Anna at the massage parlor, discovering that many were immigrants from China, Malaysia, the Philippines, and Thailand, some with false passports or through arranged marriages. Anna, married to an unemployed Briton, worked to pay off the debt from her fake marriage and help her brother in China. Lu's film portrays the mistreatment and abuse these women face, including extortion and violence from criminals offering "protection." Despite the fictional nature of the scenes, they are based on the real experiences of Anna and her colleagues. Lu arranged meetings between the actors and the women to ensure the script's authenticity. Many of these women continue in prostitution due to language barriers and the difficulty of finding well-paying jobs. The film highlights how these women live in isolation, fearing discovery by their neighbors and working with the curtains always closed. Anna, 35, had been in the sex industry for only a year when she committed suicide. Family pressure and the shame of her secret work contributed to her decision. Lu's film, partially funded by Taiwanese agencies and crowdfunding, was selected for the Edinburgh film festival and received nominations in Italy and Taiwan.


=== Depression ===

A study conducted by researchers at the Pontifical Catholic University of Rio Grande do Sul (PUC-RS) revealed that 67% of prostitutes in Porto Alegre exhibit symptoms of depression. Published in the Revista de Psiquiatria do Rio Grande do Sul, the study evaluated 97 women aged 18 to 60 who engage in prostitution in various settings, such as bars, nightclubs, and streets. The research analyzed variables such as age, educational level, religious practice, skin color, reasons for continuing the activity, average monthly income, intention to leave prostitution, condom use, sexually transmitted diseases, and illicit drug use. To assess depressive symptoms, a 21-question questionnaire about the previous week was used. Despite the participants' average monthly income of approximately one thousand reais, a relatively high figure compared to the average Brazilian salary, more than 90% continued in prostitution for economic reasons, and 86.6% expressed a desire to leave the profession. Additionally, the study found that 48.5% of the participants had had at least one abortion, nearly 30% had contracted sexually transmitted diseases, and more than 50% had a steady partner. A positive finding was that 93% of the prostitutes used condoms in their sexual relations. Condom use was associated with a lower prevalence of sexually transmitted diseases, which stood at 28.9%. The research also highlighted that 70% of women with depressive symptoms consumed alcohol and that 32.2% practiced a religion, which acted as a protective factor against depression.
The study titled "Transtorno Mental Comum em Acompanhantes de Pacientes em Internação Hospitalar de Curto e Médio Período: Um Estudo Transversal," published in the Revista Multidebates in June 2020, aimed to evaluate the prevalence of common mental disorder (CMD) in companions of patients hospitalized for short or medium periods. This cross-sectional study was conducted in a general hospital in Greater São Paulo in 2019, with a sample of 272 individuals, using the Self-Reporting Questionnaire (SRQ-20), globally validated. The results showed that 41.2% of the companions had CMD. The highest prevalence was observed in those who were the patient's children (49.1%), women (44.8%), aged 40 to 59 years (45.1%), who had another professional occupation (42%), suffered from a chronic disease (51.1%), and did not engage in physical activity (46.6%). The three sectors evaluated showed that the green sector, the first admission area, had the highest prevalence of CMD (49.5%).
In a cross-sectional study conducted in Shenyang and Guangzhou, China, in 2017, it was found that 25.25% of transgender sex workers exhibited high levels of depression. The study, which included 198 participants, used a structured questionnaire to assess background characteristics, self-esteem, feelings of defeat and entrapment, and depression. The results showed a negative correlation between self-esteem and depression, as well as between self-esteem and feelings of defeat and entrapment. Additionally, it was found that feelings of entrapment and defeat fully mediated the relationship between self-esteem and depression.


=== Anxiety ===
Anxiety is one of the most common mental disorders among sex workers due to constant exposure to high-risk situations such as violence, sexual coercion, and stigmatization. Studies have shown that sex workers exhibit significantly higher rates of anxiety symptoms compared to the general population. The prevalence of anxiety in this group can be related to multiple factors, including childhood abuse, workplace violence, and lack of social support. Additionally, sex workers often face health issues such as sexually transmitted infections and HIV, which can exacerbate their anxiety. Treating anxiety in sex workers requires a comprehensive approach that addresses both their physical and mental health through cognitive-behavioral therapy, psychological support, and, in some cases, medication.
The environment in which these women work, often characterized by a lack of security and instability, contributes to a constant sense of danger and alertness. Anxiety can manifest in a variety of symptoms, including panic attacks, irrational fear, excessive worry, hypervigilance, and difficulty sleeping. Repeated exposure to traumatic events, such as physical and sexual assaults, can also lead to the development of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), which often coexists with anxiety.
Specific research, such as the study conducted in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa, found that 78.4% of sex workers exhibited anxiety symptoms according to the Self Reporting Questionnaire (SRQ 20). This study also revealed that 72% of sex workers had experienced violence and 69% had suffered childhood abuse. These traumatic factors significantly contribute to the development of anxiety disorders and other mental health problems.


=== Difficulty in forming emotional bonds ===

Women involved in prostitution tend to be characterized by insecure attachment and cognitions marked by emotional deprivation, distrust, fear of abandonment, feelings of unworthiness of love, and submission to others' control. These factors can result in social isolation and difficulties in relational commitment, particularly in the context of romantic relationships. However, interviews with these women revealed that almost three-quarters of them reported maintaining a relationship with a person who represented a significant source of support, well-being, and could act as a catalyst for change. Nonetheless, their support network seems to depend on a specific person or, at least, a very limited number of people. Another significant finding of the study is that when women reveal their involvement in prostitution to their loved ones, the latter tend to position themselves as positive actors in the change process rather than being a source of rejection and stigmatization. Direct interventions with loved ones should inform them that the support they can provide to these women is necessary.
Most women (78%) reported that sex work negatively affected their personal romantic relationships, mainly due to issues of lying, trust, guilt, and jealousy. A small number of women reported positive impacts of sex work, such as better sexual self-esteem and confidence. About half of the women were in a relationship at the time of the study, and of these, 51% reported that their partner knew the nature of their work. 77% of single women chose to remain single due to the nature of their work. Many women used mental separation as a coping mechanism to manage the tensions between sex work and their personal relationships.
The main ways in which sex work negatively affected women in relationships included dishonesty, distrust, jealousy, stigma, and pragmatic issues. Women in relationships often lied to their partners about the nature of their work, causing guilt and trust issues. Partners who knew about the women's work often experienced jealousy and misunderstandings due to the stigma associated with the sex industry.
More than half of the women in the study were single, primarily by choice, due to the nature of their work. Some women chose to remain single because they were not comfortable with the idea of having a relationship while working in the sex industry, or because they felt their partners would not be comfortable with their work.
About half of the women mentioned the need to maintain a distinction between their work and personal lives, using separation as a coping mechanism. More than half of the women found it difficult to mentally separate their work lives from their personal lives. Some strategies included not socializing with other sex workers outside of work and using condoms with clients but not with romantic partners. The findings of this study coincide with and expand on previous studies that also found that women working in the sex industry commonly report negative impacts on their relationships due to issues of dishonesty, trust, and guilt. The stigma associated with the sex industry was a significant barrier in the personal relationships of sex workers, leading to issues of support and understanding from their partners.


=== Social isolation ===

The mental health of sex workers is affected by a variety of factors, including social isolation, loneliness, and the social stigma associated with their occupation. These factors not only influence their emotional well-being but also interact with structural aspects such as criminalization and violence. The mode of work, whether solitary or with colleagues, also plays an important role in their daily experience and mental health. The lack of information and the infantilizing treatment they often receive contribute to a negative self-image and the perception of being unable to make decisions about their own lives, further exacerbating mental health issues in this group.
Social isolation and loneliness have a strong impact on the mental health of sex workers. A study conducted by the "European Sex Workers' Rights Alliance" showed that more than 70% of respondents considered that isolation greatly affects mental health. The mode of sex work can also influence their ability to work with colleagues or individually. Focus group participants indicated that the inherent loneliness of escorting was difficult to manage, while a participant who worked on the streets with colleagues mentioned enjoying having people around. A sex worker in Finland expressed that upon entering this industry, the lack of information is so great and the loneliness is so intense that it deeply affects them. Another impact of social stigma on mental health is the underlying assumption that sex workers are victims. A sex worker in Finland commented that they are not asked for their opinion or listened to, and that others make decisions for them, assuming they are incapable of choosing for themselves, which contributes to infantilization that can generate negative self-images and negatively affect mental health. Stigma acts as an umbrella factor that intertwines with many other structural factors influencing the mental health of sex workers, such as criminalization or violence.


=== Low self-esteem ===

Low self-esteem is a significant factor in the mental health of many people, and among sex workers, this issue can be especially pronounced. Self-esteem, defined as the value a person places on themselves, influences how they perceive and relate to the world. In the context of sex workers, low self-esteem is often related to experiences of rejection, social stigmatization, and traumatic situations. These women may face a cycle of self-criticism and personal worthlessness, exacerbated by discrimination and marginalization in their daily lives.
People with low self-esteem are more susceptible to manipulation and exploitation by pimps and other exploiters. There is a connection between low self-esteem and prostitution. In some cases, pimps use underage sex workers to recruit other residents of group homes. Sexual abuse can have a significant impact on self-esteem. Adopted individuals and those who have suffered sexual abuse tend to experience low self-esteem and difficulties in relationships.
Numerous studies have shown that low self-esteem is closely linked to a range of mental health problems, such as depression and anxiety. Sex workers with low self-esteem may feel trapped in their circumstances, unable to see a viable way out, reinforcing feelings of defeat and hopelessness. This cycle of negativity can be difficult to break without adequate support and intervention strategies that address both emotional aspects and social contexts that perpetuate low self-esteem.
The study "Sex work and three dimensions of self-esteem: self-worth, authenticity and self-efficacy" analyzes the relationship between sex work and self-esteem. The study uses a heterogeneous sample of 218 Canadian sex workers providing services in various locations, utilizing a three-dimensional framework of self-esteem: self-worth, authenticity (being oneself), and self-efficacy (competence).
Sex work is assumed to have a negative effect on self-esteem, expressed almost exclusively as low self-esteem due to its social unacceptability, despite the diversity of people, positions, and roles within the sex industry. In this study, a heterogeneous sample of 218 Canadian sex workers delivering services in various locations was asked how their work affected their sense of self. Using a thematic analysis based on a three-dimensional conception of self-esteem, we shed light on the relationship between engagement in sex work and self-esteem. The findings demonstrate that the relationship between sex work and self-esteem is complex: most participants discussed multiple dimensions of self-esteem and often spoke about how sex work had both positive and negative effects on their sense of self. Social background factors, the location of work, and life events and experiences also had an effect on self-esteem. Future research should adopt a more complex approach to understanding these issues by considering elements beyond self-esteem, such as authenticity and self-efficacy, and examining how the backgrounds and individual motivations of sex workers intersect with these three dimensions.
In a study titled "Evaluation of Self-Esteem of Female Sex Workers," focusing on analyzing the self-esteem of sex workers in Campina Grande-PB, the results showed that these women's self-esteem is low, influenced by the social stigma associated with prostitution and personal factors such as motherhood, family context, and age. Additionally, the study noted that younger workers charged more for their services than older ones, showing an economic impact of age on their profession.


==== Cultural differences ====
In the article "Self-esteem and cognitive distortion among women involved in prostitution in Malaysia," published in Procedia Social and Behavioral Sciences (2010), authors Rohany Nasir et al. examine how self-esteem and cognitive distortions vary among Muslim and non-Muslim women in Malaysia. Using the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale and Briere's Cognitive distortion Scale, the study reveals that Muslim prostitutes have significantly lower self-esteem and higher cognitive distortions compared to their non-Muslim counterparts. Additionally, a negative correlation was found between self-esteem and cognitive distortion, suggesting that higher self-esteem is associated with lower cognitive distortions.


=== Cognitive impairment ===
Research titled "Screening for Traumatic Brain Injury in Prostituted Women" highlights that violence is a predominant aspect of prostitution and a significant cause of TBI. 95% of participants had suffered head injuries, frequently as a result of being hit with objects or having their heads slammed against surfaces. Notably, 61% of the head injuries occurred while engaged in prostitution. The study documents both acute and chronic symptoms associated with these injuries, including dizziness, depression, headaches, sleep problems, concentration and memory difficulties, trouble following instructions, low frustration tolerance, fatigue, and changes in appetite and weight.
The study highlights the importance of screening for Traumatic brain injury (TBI) to ensure effective care for prostituted women. The authors note that TBIs, often caused by blows to the head or violent shaking, are common in interpersonal assaults, more than in accidents or falls. Additionally, head injuries are frequent in intimate partner violence (IPV), and women in prostitution often experience high rates of this type of violence.


== Treatment ==
Psychotherapy for these women must be tailored to their specific needs, considering the use of crisis interventions and the building of coping skills during severe stress episodes. During periods of milder symptoms, a psychodynamic approach focused on self-reflection and deep exploration can be employed. The therapeutic relationship is necessary to establish trust and safety, allowing patients to explore their experiences and develop healthier coping mechanisms. Understanding transference and countertransference is essential for effective treatment, and clear professional boundaries must be maintained to avoid breaches that could harm the therapeutic relationship.


== Long-term psychological effects ==
Transitioning from life in prostitution to life outside this activity involves profound psychological issues. The experience of having worked in the sex industry carries a series of long-term repercussions that affect mental and emotional health. In the text "Life After Prostitution" by Bethany St. James, the psychological impact of her experience in the adult entertainment industry is described. Although superficially the industry seemed benevolent, it was actually extremely damaging and unhealthy.
Upon leaving the industry, St. James faced an identity crisis, having spent 20 years in an environment that, though incomprehensible to outsiders, made sense to her. Leaving this life meant losing her identity and feeling disoriented in the real world. This lack of identity outside of work left her emotionally unstable, unable to relate to people outside the business. Removing the facade she had built as Bethany St. James left her feeling vulnerable and exposed. Everyday tasks began to trigger panic attacks, leading her to believe she was experiencing a mental breakdown. Seeking a new identity through her Christian faith and church participation did not provide the expected comfort, as her past experiences significantly differentiated her from her new peers, causing isolation and judgment from the religious community.
These emotional and social problems culminated in the appearance of severe PTSD symptoms. Comparing herself to her husband, a veteran with war-related PTSD, revealed that her form of PTSD was opposite to his: while he couldn't turn off his emergency response system, she didn't know how to react to normal situations after living in a constant state of alert. Cognitive therapy revealed that St. James had developed coping mechanisms that allowed her to neutralize normal emotional responses, making stressful situations seem routine. This emotional imbalance prevented her from recognizing the damage she had inflicted on herself over the years. The diagnosis of severe PTSD made her understand that her inability to perceive her experiences as traumatic was part of the problem. Not feeling that she had lived through traumatic events contrasted with others' perceptions, who saw her experiences as clearly traumatic. Therapy helped her process and heal, allowing her to understand and accept the complexity of her past and present life.
The study "Symptoms of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder and Mental Health in Women Who Escaped Prostitution and Helping Activists in Shelters," published in 2008, analyzes women who escaped prostitution, activists helping them in shelters, and a control group. The researchers found that former prostitutes exhibited significantly higher levels of PTSD symptoms, stress, somatization, depression, fatigue, sleep problems, smoking, and alcoholism compared to the other two groups. Activists also showed higher levels of tension, sleep problems, and smoking, and more frequent and severe PTSD symptoms than the control group.
The research concludes that participation in prostitution increases the risk of exposure to violence, which can cause psychological trauma in both the women involved and those who help them. These effects can be long-lasting, and the need to develop methods to assess and mitigate vicarious trauma in workers assisting prostitution victims is suggested. Additionally, the importance of early diagnosis and treatment is highlighted to reduce the social and economic burden of PTSD.


== Case studies ==


=== Prostitutes of Minas Gerais ===
A cross-sectional study conducted in Minas Gerais evaluated the prevalence of common mental disorders (CMD) and associated factors in a group of prostitutes. The Self-Reporting Questionnaire (SRQ-20) was used to interview 216 women registered with the Prostitutes' Association of Minas Gerais (Aprosmig) between November 2012 and May 2013. The study analyzed sociodemographic characteristics and aspects of sex work, using the chi-squared test to examine the association between categorical variables and the presence of CMD, and employing a logistic regression model to identify factors associated with CMD. The overall prevalence of CMD was 57.9%, being more frequent in women with low education, history of physical violence, and early entry into prostitution. Women with less than eight years of schooling had twice the likelihood of developing CMD (OR = 2.05), and those with a history of physical violence also showed a significantly higher likelihood (OR = 2.18). The study concludes the need to improve healthcare for this group, given the high rates of CMD compared to the general population.


=== Women trafficked for sexual exploitation ===
The study titled "A Study on the Psychological Effects on Women Who Were Trafficked for Sexual Exploitation" addresses the psychological consequences experienced by women victims of trafficking for sexual exploitation. The research is based on various documentaries available on YouTube, including "Trafficking of Women for Sexual Exploitation" and "Amazonas Has a Human Trafficking Route Without Oversight." Human trafficking is a serious crime that infringes on women's rights, making them vulnerable in various psychological aspects. According to the UN, human trafficking generates $32 billion annually, with 85% coming from sexual exploitation and 98% of victims being women. The Palermo Protocol defines human trafficking as the recruitment, transportation, and exploitation of people through coercion, fraud, or abuse of vulnerability. This crime can involve luring and prolonged exploitation, causing severe psychological harm to the victims. Trafficked women generally come from regions with high poverty rates and low education, making them easy targets for traffickers who promise better living conditions abroad.
The study's methodology is exploratory and qualitative, using documentary data and victim testimonies. The analyzed documentaries recount real stories of suffering and exploitation, highlighting psychological effects categories such as objectification, desire for death, fear, fear of death, pain/suffering, and sadness. The results show that victims suffer deep psychological traumas, including depression, anxiety, suicide attempts, and post-traumatic stress disorder. Psychology plays a crucial role in the recovery of these women, helping them overcome traumas and rebuild their lives. The study concludes that trafficking of women for sexual exploitation is a continuous violence crime causing long-lasting psychological harm.


=== Risk factors study ===
The systematic review "Invisible and Stigmatized: A Systematic Review of Mental Health and Risk Factors Among Sex Workers," published in Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, examines the mental health and associated risk factors in sex workers (SW). The research, conducted by Laura Martín-Romo, Francisco J. Sanmartín, and Judith Velasco, analyzes studies published between 2010 and 2022 in various databases. Of 527 studies identified, 30 met the inclusion criteria.
The review highlights the prevalence of mental health issues among SWs, with depression being the most common problem, followed by anxiety, substance abuse, and suicidal ideation. SWs are exposed to multiple occupational risks, including violence and high-risk sexual behaviors, and face significant barriers to accessing health services due to stigma. SWs have higher probabilities of being diagnosed with mood disorders, with depression rates ranging between 50% and 88%. Anxiety affects between 13.6% and 51% of SWs, while post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) has a prevalence between 10% and 39.6%.
Substance abuse is common, with problematic alcohol use reported between 36.7% and 45.4% of SWs. Women are the majority in sex work, and lack of social support is associated with poorer psychological adaptation. Violence is a significant risk factor, with studies indicating that SWs experience high levels of violence, contributing to mental health problems. The review suggests that unfavorable working conditions, lack of access to health services, and stigma play a crucial role in the poor mental health of SWs. The review notes the need for longitudinal studies and a better understanding of the clinical backgrounds of SWs to determine the impact of sex work on mental health.


=== AESHA study in Vancouver ===
In a study conducted in Vancouver, Canada, titled An Evaluation of Sex Workers Health Access (AESHA), it was found that 48.8% of the sex workers surveyed reported having ever been diagnosed with a mental health issue, with the most common diagnoses being depression (35.1%) and anxiety (19.9%). This study used interviewer-administered questionnaires and bivariate and multivariable logistic regression analyses to evaluate the burden of mental health diagnoses and their correlations. The study's findings highlighted that sex workers with mental health diagnoses were more likely to identify as sexual/gender minorities (LGBTQ), use non-injection drugs, have experienced physical/sexual trauma in childhood, and work in informal or public spaces. These findings show the need for evidence-based interventions addressing the intersections between trauma and mental health, along with policies promoting access to safer workspaces and adequate health services. Sex workers often operate in environments characterized by insecurity and instability, contributing to a constant sense of danger and alertness. Anxiety can manifest in various symptoms, including panic attacks, irrational fears, excessive worry, hypervigilance, and sleep difficulties. Repeated exposure to traumatic events can lead to the development of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), which often coexists with anxiety. The Vancouver study also revealed that sex workers with mental health diagnoses were more likely to have used non-injection drugs and experienced physical or sexual violence, both in childhood and adulthood. These traumatic factors significantly contribute to the development of anxiety disorders and other mental health issues. Additionally, identifying as a sexual/gender minority was strongly associated with mental health diagnoses, due to the structural discrimination and stigma faced by these individuals.


== See also ==
Prostitution
Post-traumatic stress disorder
Sexual abuse
Body dysmorphic disorder
Violence against women
Sexual exploitation


== References ==


== Bibliography ==


== External links ==
Study on Prostitution and Its Psychological Impacts
Psychological Consequences of Prostitution
Dissociative Identity Disorder
Impact of Prostitution on Women's Identity
Mental Health Impacts of the Sex Trade
Psychotherapy for Victims of Prostitution
Violence and Prostitution: An Analysis
The Invisibility of Harm in Prostitution
Post-traumatic Stress in Prostitution Victims
Types of Sex Workers and Their Environments

Document similaire: Mental wellness (Similarité: 0.5096)
Mental health encompasses emotional, psychological, and social well-being, influencing cognition, perception, and behavior. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), it is a "state of well-being in which the individual realizes his or her abilities, can cope with the normal stresses of life, can work productively and fruitfully, and can contribute to his or her community". It likewise determines how an individual handles stress, interpersonal relationships, and decision-making. Mental health includes subjective well-being, perceived self-efficacy, autonomy, competence, intergenerational dependence,  and self-actualization of one's intellectual and emotional potential, among others.
From the perspectives of positive psychology or holism, mental health may include an individual's ability to enjoy life and to create a balance between life activities and efforts to achieve psychological resilience. Cultural differences, personal philosophy, subjective assessments, and competing professional theories all affect how one defines "mental health". Some early signs related to mental health difficulties are sleep irritation, lack of energy, lack of appetite, thinking of harming oneself or others, self-isolating (though introversion and isolation aren't necessarily unhealthy), and frequently zoning out.


== Mental disorders ==

Mental health, as defined by the Public Health Agency of Canada, is an individual's capacity to feel, think, and act in ways to achieve a better quality of life while respecting personal, social, and cultural boundaries. Impairment of any of these are risk factor for mental disorders, or mental illnesses, which are a component of mental health. In 2019, about 970 million people worldwide suffered from a mental disorder, with anxiety and depression being the most common. The number of people suffering from mental disorders has risen significantly throughout the years. Mental disorders are defined as health conditions that affect and alter cognitive functioning, emotional responses, and behavior associated with distress and/or impaired functioning. The ICD-11 is the global standard used to diagnose, treat, research, and report various mental disorders. In the United States, the DSM-5 is used as the classification system of mental disorders.
Mental health is associated with a number of lifestyle factors such as diet, exercise, stress, drug abuse, social connections and interactions. Psychiatrists, psychologists, licensed professional clinical counselors, social workers, nurse practitioners, and family physicians can help manage mental illness with treatments such as therapy, counseling, and medication.


== History ==


=== Early history ===

In the mid-19th century, William Sweetser was the first to coin the term mental hygiene, which can be seen as the precursor to contemporary approaches to work on promoting positive mental health. Isaac Ray, the fourth president of the American Psychiatric Association and one of its founders, further defined mental hygiene as "the art of preserving the mind against all incidents and influences calculated to deteriorate its qualities, impair its energies, or derange its movements".
In American history, mentally ill patients were thought to be religiously punished. This response persisted through the 1700s, along with the inhumane confinement and stigmatization of such individuals. Dorothea Dix (1802–1887) was an important figure in the development of the "mental hygiene" movement. Dix was a school teacher who endeavored to help people with mental disorders and to expose the sub-standard conditions into which they were put. This became known as the "mental hygiene movement". Before this movement, it was not uncommon that people affected by mental illness would be considerably neglected, often left alone in deplorable conditions without sufficient clothing. From 1840 to 1880, she won the support of the federal government to set up over 30 state psychiatric hospitals; however, they were understaffed, under-resourced, and were accused of violating human rights.
Emil Kraepelin in 1896 developed the taxonomy of mental disorders which has dominated the field for nearly 80 years. Later, the proposed disease model of abnormality was subjected to analysis and considered normality to be relative to the physical, geographical and cultural aspects of the defining group.
At the beginning of the 20th century, Clifford Beers founded "Mental Health America – National Committee for Mental Hygiene", after publication of his accounts as a patient in several lunatic asylums, A Mind That Found Itself, in 1908 and opened the first outpatient mental health clinic in the United States.
The mental hygiene movement, similar to the social hygiene movement, had at times been associated with advocating eugenics and sterilization of those considered too mentally deficient to be assisted into productive work and contented family life. In the post-WWII years, references to mental hygiene were gradually replaced by the term 'mental health' due to its positive aspect that evolves from the treatment of illness to preventive and promotive areas of healthcare.


==== Deinstitutionalization and transinstitutionalization ====
When US government-run hospitals were accused of violating human rights, advocates pushed for deinstitutionalization: the replacement of federal mental hospitals for community mental health services. The closure of state-provisioned psychiatric hospitals was enforced by the Community Mental Health Centers Act in 1963 that laid out terms in which only patients who posed an imminent danger to others or themselves could be admitted into state facilities. This was seen as an improvement from previous conditions. However, there remains a debate on the conditions of these community resources.
It has been proven that this transition was beneficial for many patients: there was an increase in overall satisfaction, a better quality of life, and more friendships between patients all at an affordable cost. This proved to be true only in the circumstance that treatment facilities had enough funding for staff and equipment as well as proper management. However, this idea is a polarizing issue. Critics of deinstitutionalization argue that poor living conditions prevailed, patients were lonely, and they did not acquire proper medical care in these treatment homes. Additionally, patients that were moved from state psychiatric care to nursing and residential homes had deficits in crucial aspects of their treatment. Some cases result in the shift of care from health workers to patients' families, where they do not have the proper funding or medical expertise to give proper care. On the other hand, patients that are treated in community mental health centers lack sufficient cancer testing, vaccinations, or otherwise regular medical check-ups.
Other critics of state deinstitutionalization argue that this was simply a transition to "transinstitutionalization", or the idea that prisons and state-provisioned hospitals are interdependent. In other words, patients become inmates. This draws on the Penrose Hypothesis of 1939, which theorized that there was an inverse relationship between prisons' population size and the number of psychiatric hospital beds. This means that populations that require psychiatric mental care will transition between institutions, which in this case, includes state psychiatric hospitals and criminal justice systems. Thus, a decrease in available psychiatric hospital beds occurred at the same time as an increase in inmates. Although some are skeptical that this is due to other external factors, others will reason this conclusion to a lack of empathy for the mentally ill. There is no argument for the social stigmatization of those with mental illnesses, they have been widely marginalized and discriminated against in society. In this source, researchers analyze how most compensation prisoners (detainees who are unable or unwilling to pay a fine for petty crimes) are unemployed, homeless, and with an extraordinarily high degree of mental illnesses and substance use disorders. Compensation prisoners then lose prospective job opportunities, face social marginalization, and lack access to resocialization programs, which ultimately facilitate reoffending. The research sheds light on how the mentally ill—and in this case, the poor—are further punished for certain circumstances that are beyond their control, and that this is a vicious cycle that repeats itself. Thus, prisons embody another state-provisioned mental hospital.
Families of patients, advocates, and mental health professionals still call for increase in more well-structured community facilities and treatment programs with a higher quality of long-term inpatient resources and care. With this more structured environment, the United States will continue with more access to mental health care and an increase in the overall treatment of the mentally ill.
However, there is still a lack of studies for mental health conditions (MHCs) to raise awareness, knowledge development, and attitudes toward seeking medical treatment for MHCs in Bangladesh. People in rural areas often seek treatment from the traditional healers and MHCs are sometimes considered a spiritual matter.


== Epidemiology ==

Mental illnesses are more common than cancer, diabetes, or heart disease. As of 2021, over 22 percent of all Americans over the age of 18 meet the criteria for having a mental illness. Evidence suggests that 970 million people worldwide have a mental disorder. Major depression ranks third among the top 10 leading causes of disease worldwide. By 2030, it is predicted to become the leading cause of disease worldwide. Over 700 thousand people commit suicide every year and around 14 million attempt it. A World Health Organization (WHO) report estimates the global cost of mental illness at nearly $2.5 trillion (two-thirds in indirect costs) in 2010, with a projected increase to over $6 trillion by 2030.
Evidence from the WHO suggests that nearly half of the world's population is affected by mental illness with an impact on their self-esteem, relationships and ability to function in everyday life. An individual's emotional health can impact their physical health. Poor mental health can lead to problems such as the inability to make adequate decisions and substance use disorders.
Good mental health can improve life quality whereas poor mental health can worsen it. According to Richards, Campania, & Muse-Burke, "There is growing evidence that is showing emotional abilities are associated with pro-social behaviors such as stress management and physical health." Their research also concluded that people who lack emotional expression are inclined to anti-social behaviors (e.g., substance use disorder and alcohol use disorder, physical fights, vandalism), which reflects one's mental health and suppressed emotions. Adults and children who face mental illness may experience social stigma, which can exacerbate the issues.


=== Global prevalence ===

Mental health can be seen as a continuum, where an individual's mental health may have many different possible values. Mental wellness is viewed as a positive attribute; this definition of mental health highlights emotional well-being, the capacity to live a full and creative life, and the flexibility to deal with life's inevitable challenges. Some discussions are formulated in terms of contentment or happiness. Many therapeutic systems and self-help books offer methods and philosophies espousing strategies and techniques vaunted as effective for further improving the mental wellness. Positive psychology is increasingly prominent in mental health.
A holistic model of mental health generally includes concepts based upon anthropological, educational, psychological, religious, and sociological perspectives. There are also models as theoretical perspectives from personality, social, clinical, health and developmental psychology.
The tripartite model of mental well-being views mental well-being as encompassing three components of emotional well-being, social well-being, and psychological well-being. Emotional well-being is defined as having high levels of positive emotions, whereas social and psychological well-being are defined as the presence of psychological and social skills and abilities that contribute to optimal functioning in daily life. The model has received empirical support across cultures. The Mental Health Continuum-Short Form (MHC-SF) is the most widely used scale to measure the tripartite model of mental well-being.


=== Demographics ===


==== Children and young adults ====

As of 2019, about one in seven of the world's 10–19 year olds experienced a mental health disorder; about 165 million young people in total. A person's teenage years are a unique period where much crucial psychological development occurs, and is also a time of increased vulnerability to the development of adverse mental health conditions. More than half of mental health conditions start before a child reaches 20 years of age, with onset occurring in adolescence much more frequently than it does in early childhood or adulthood. Many such cases go undetected and untreated.
In the United States alone, in 2021, at least roughly 17.5% of the population (ages 18 and older) were recorded as having a mental illness. The comparison between reports and statistics of mental health issues in newer generations (18–25 years old to 26–49 years old) and the older generation (50 years or older) signifies an increase in mental health issues as only 15% of the older generation reported a mental health issue whereas the newer generations reported 33.7% (18-25) and 28.1% (26-49).  The role of caregivers for youth with mental health needs is valuable, and caregivers benefit most when they have sufficient psychoeducation and peer support. Depression is one of the leading causes of illness and disability among adolescents. Suicide is the fourth leading cause of death in 15-19-year-olds. Exposure to childhood trauma can cause mental health disorders and poor academic achievement. Ignoring mental health conditions in adolescents can impact adulthood. 50% of preschool children show a natural reduction in behavioral problems. The remaining experience long-term consequences. It impairs physical and mental health and limits opportunities to live fulfilling lives. A result of depression during adolescence and adulthood may be substance abuse. The average age of onset is between 11 and 14 years for depressive disorders. Only approximately 25% of children with behavioral problems refer to medical services. The majority of children go untreated.


==== Homeless population ====

Mental illness is thought to be highly prevalent among homeless populations, though access to proper diagnoses is limited. An article written by Lisa Goodman and her colleagues summarized Smith's research into PTSD in homeless single women and mothers in St. Louis, Missouri, which found that 53% of the respondents met diagnostic criteria, and which describes homelessness as a risk factor for mental illness. At least two commonly reported symptoms of psychological trauma, social disaffiliation and learned helplessness are highly prevalent among homeless individuals and families.
While mental illness is prevalent, people infrequently receive appropriate care. Case management linked to other services is an effective care approach for improving symptoms in people experiencing homelessness. Case management reduced admission to hospitals, and it reduced substance use by those with substance abuse problems more than typical care.


==== Immigrants and refugees ====

States that produce refugees are sites of social upheaval, civil war, even genocide. Most refugees experience trauma. It can be in the form of torture, sexual assault, family fragmentation, and death of loved ones.
Refugees and immigrants experience psychosocial stressors after resettlement. These include discrimination, lack of economic stability, and social isolation causing emotional distress. For example, Not far into the 1900s, campaigns targeting Japanese immigrants were being formed that inhibited their ability to participate in U.S life, painting them as a threat to the American working-class. They were subject to prejudice and slandered by American media as well as anti-Japanese legislation being implemented. For refugees family reunification can be one of the primary needs to improve quality of life. Post-migration trauma is a cause of depressive disorders and psychological distress for immigrants.


==== Cultural and religious considerations ====
Mental health is a socially constructed concept; different societies, groups, cultures (both ethnic and national/regional), institutions, and professions have very different ways of conceptualizing its nature and causes, determining what is mentally healthy, and deciding what interventions, if any, are appropriate. Thus, different professionals will have different cultural, class, political and religious backgrounds, which will impact the methodology applied during treatment. In the context of deaf mental health care, it is necessary for professionals to have cultural competency of deaf and hard of hearing people and to understand how to properly rely on trained, qualified, and certified interpreters when working with culturally Deaf clients.
Research has shown that there is stigma attached to mental illness. Due to such stigma, individuals may resist labeling and may be driven to respond to mental health diagnoses with denialism. Family caregivers of individuals with mental disorders may also suffer discrimination or face stigma.
Addressing and eliminating the social stigma and perceived stigma attached to mental illness has been recognized as crucial to education and awareness surrounding mental health issues. In the United Kingdom, the Royal College of Psychiatrists organized the campaign Changing Minds (1998–2003) to help reduce stigma, while in the United States, efforts by entities such as the Born This Way Foundation and The Manic Monologues specifically focus on removing the stigma surrounding mental illness. The National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI) is a U.S. institution founded in 1979 to represent and advocate for those struggling with mental health issues. NAMI helps to educate about mental illnesses and health issues, while also working to eliminate stigma attached to these disorders.
Many mental health professionals are beginning to, or already understand, the importance of competency in religious diversity and spirituality, or the lack thereof. They are also partaking in cultural training to better understand which interventions work best for these different groups of people. The American Psychological Association explicitly states that religion must be respected. Education in spiritual and religious matters is also required by the American Psychiatric Association, however, far less attention is paid to the damage that more rigid, fundamentalist faiths commonly practiced in the United States can cause. This theme has been widely politicized in 2018 such as with the creation of the Religious Liberty Task Force in July of that year. Also, many providers and practitioners in the United States are only beginning to realize that the institution of mental healthcare lacks knowledge and competence of many non-Western cultures, leaving providers in the United States ill-equipped to treat patients from different cultures.


=== Occupations ===


=== Occupational therapy ===
Occupational therapy practitioners aim to improve and enable a client or group's participation in meaningful, everyday occupations. In this sense, occupation is defined as any activity that "occupies one's time". Examples of those activities include daily tasks (dressing, bathing, eating, house chores, driving, etc.), sleep and rest, education, work, play, leisure (hobbies), and social interactions. The OT profession offers a vast range of services for all stages of life in a myriad of practice settings, though the foundations of OT come from mental health. Community support for mental health through expert-moderated support groups can aid those who want to recover from mental illness or otherwise improve their emotional well-being.
OT services focused on mental health can be provided to persons, groups, and populations  across the lifespan and experiencing varying levels of mental health performance. For example, occupational therapy practitioners provide mental health services in school systems, military environments, hospitals, outpatient clinics, and inpatient mental health rehabilitation settings. Interventions or support can be provided directly through specific treatment interventions or indirectly by providing consultation to businesses, schools, or other larger groups to incorporate mental health strategies on a programmatic level. Even people who are mentally healthy can benefit from the health promotion and additional prevention strategies to reduce the impact of difficult situations.
The interventions focus on positive functioning, sensory strategies, managing emotions, interpersonal relationships, sleep, community engagement, and other cognitive skills (i.e. visual-perceptual skills, attention, memory, arousal/energy management, etc.).


==== Mental health in social work ====

Social work in mental health, also called psychiatric social work, is a process where an individual in a setting is helped to attain freedom from overlapping internal and external problems (social and economic situations, family and other relationships, the physical and organizational environment, psychiatric symptoms, etc.). It aims for harmony, quality of life, self-actualization and personal adaptation across all systems. Psychiatric social workers are mental health professionals that can assist patients and their family members in coping with both mental health issues and various economic or social problems caused by mental illness or psychiatric dysfunctions and to attain improved mental health and well-being. They are vital members of the treatment teams in Departments of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences in hospitals. They are employed in both outpatient and inpatient settings of a hospital, nursing homes, state and local governments, substance use clinics, correctional facilities, health care services, private practice, etc.
In the United States, social workers provide most of the mental health services. According to government sources, 60 percent of mental health professionals are clinically trained social workers, 10 percent are psychiatrists, 23 percent are psychologists, and 5 percent are psychiatric nurses.
Mental health social workers in Japan have professional knowledge of health and welfare and skills essential for person's well-being. Their social work training enables them as a professional to carry out Consultation assistance for mental disabilities and their social reintegration; Consultation regarding the rehabilitation of the victims; Advice and guidance for post-discharge residence and re-employment after hospitalized care, for major life events in regular life, money and self-management and other relevant matters to equip them to adapt in daily life. Social workers provide individual home visits for mentally ill and do welfare services available, with specialized training a range of procedural services are coordinated for home, workplace and school. In an administrative relationship, Psychiatric social workers provides consultation, leadership, conflict management and work direction. Psychiatric social workers who provides assessment and psychosocial interventions function as a clinician, counselor and municipal staff of the health centers.


== Risk factors and causes of mental health problems ==

There are many things that can contribute to mental health problems, including biological factors, genetic factors, life experiences (such as psychological trauma or abuse), and a family history of mental health problems.


=== Biological factors ===
According to the National Institute of Health Curriculum Supplement Series book, most scientists believe that changes in neurotransmitters can cause mental illnesses. In the section "The Biology of Mental Illnesses" the issue is explained in detail, "...there may be disruptions in the neurotransmitters dopamine, glutamate, and norepinephrine in individuals who have schizophrenia".


=== Demographic factors ===
Gender, age, ethnicity, life expectancy, longevity, population density, and community diversity are all demographic characteristics that can increase the risk and severity of mental disorders. Existing evidence demonstrates that the female gender is connected with an elevated risk of depression at different phases of life, commencing in adolescence in different contexts. Females, for example, have a higher risk of anxiety and eating disorders, whereas males have a higher chance of substance abuse and behavioral and developmental issues. This does not imply that women are less likely to suffer from developmental disorders such autism spectrum disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, Tourette syndrome, or early-onset schizophrenia. Ethnicity and ethnic heterogeneity have also been identified as risk factors for the prevalence of mental disorders, with minority groups being at a higher risk due to discrimination and exclusion.
Unemployment has been shown to hurt an individual's emotional well-being, self-esteem, and more broadly their mental health. Increasing unemployment has been shown to have a significant impact on mental health, predominantly depressive disorders. This is an important consideration when reviewing the triggers for mental health disorders in any population survey. According to a 2009 meta-analysis by Paul and Moser, countries with high income inequality and poor unemployment protections experience worse mental health outcomes among the unemployed.

Emotional mental disorders are a leading cause of disabilities worldwide. Investigating the degree and severity of untreated emotional mental disorders throughout the world is a top priority of the World Mental Health (WMH) survey initiative, which was created in 1998 by the World Health Organization (WHO). "Neuropsychiatric disorders are the leading causes of disability worldwide, accounting for 37% of all healthy life years lost through disease. These disorders are most destructive to low and middle-income countries due to their inability to provide their citizens with proper aid. Despite modern treatment and rehabilitation for emotional mental health disorders, "even economically advantaged societies have competing priorities and budgetary constraints".
Unhappily married couples suffer 3–25 times the risk of developing clinical depression.
The World Mental Health survey initiative has suggested a plan for countries to redesign their mental health care systems to best allocate resources.
"A first step is documentation of services being used and the extent and nature of unmet treatment needs. A second step could be to do a cross-national comparison of service use and unmet needs in countries with different mental health care systems. Such comparisons can help to uncover optimum financing, national policies, and delivery systems for mental health care."
Knowledge of how to provide effective emotional mental health care has become imperative worldwide. Unfortunately, most countries have insufficient data to guide decisions, absent or competing visions for resources, and near-constant pressures to cut insurance and entitlements. WMH surveys were done in Africa (Nigeria, South Africa), the Americas (Colombia, Mexico, United States), Asia and the Pacific (Japan, New Zealand, Beijing and Shanghai in the People's Republic of China), Europe (Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Spain, Ukraine), and the Middle East (Israel, Lebanon). Countries were classified with World Bank criteria as low-income (Nigeria), lower-middle-income (China, Colombia, South Africa, Ukraine), higher middle-income (Lebanon, Mexico), and high-income.
The coordinated surveys on emotional mental health disorders, their severity, and treatments were implemented in the aforementioned countries. These surveys assessed the frequency, types, and adequacy of mental health service use in 17 countries in which WMH surveys are complete. The WMH also examined unmet needs for treatment in strata defined by the seriousness of mental disorders. Their research showed that "the number of respondents using any 12-month mental health service was generally lower in developing than in developed countries, and the proportion receiving services tended to correspond to countries' percentages of gross domestic product spent on health care".
"High levels of unmet need worldwide are not surprising, since WHO Project ATLAS' findings of much lower mental health expenditures than was suggested by the magnitude of burdens from mental illnesses. Generally, unmet needs in low-income and middle-income countries might be attributable to these nations spending reduced amounts (usually <1%) of already diminished health budgets on mental health care, and they rely heavily on out-of-pocket spending by citizens who are ill-equipped for it".


=== Stress ===

The Centre for Addiction and Mental Health discusses how a certain amount of stress is a normal part of daily life. Small doses of stress help people meet deadlines, be prepared for presentations, be productive and arrive on time for important events. However, long-term stress can become harmful. When stress becomes overwhelming and prolonged, the risks for mental health problems and medical problems increase." Also on that note, some studies have found language to deteriorate mental health and even harm humans.
The impact of a stressful environment has also been highlighted by different models. Mental health has often been understood from the lens of the vulnerability-stress model. In that context, stressful situations may contribute to a preexisting vulnerability to negative mental health outcomes being realized. On the other hand, the differential susceptibility hypothesis suggests that mental health outcomes are better explained by an increased sensitivity to the environment than by vulnerability. For example, it was found that children scoring higher on observer-rated environmental sensitivity often derive more harm from low-quality parenting, but also more benefits from high-quality parenting than those children scoring lower on that measure.


=== Poverty ===


=== Environmental factors ===


== Prevention and promotion ==

"The terms mental health promotion and prevention have often been confused. Promotion is defined as intervening to optimize positive mental health by addressing determinants of positive mental health (i.e. protective factors) before a specific mental health problem has been identified, with the ultimate goal of improving the positive mental health of the population. Mental health prevention is defined as intervening to minimize mental health problems (i.e. risk factors) by addressing determinants of mental health problems before a specific mental health problem has been identified in the individual, group, or population of focus with the ultimate goal of reducing the number of future mental health problems in the population."
In order to improve mental health, the root of the issue has to be resolved. "Prevention emphasizes the avoidance of risk factors; promotion aims to enhance an individual's ability to achieve a positive sense of self-esteem, mastery, well-being, and social inclusion." Mental health promotion attempts to increase protective factors and healthy behaviors that can help prevent the onset of a diagnosable mental disorder and reduce risk factors that can lead to the development of a mental disorder. Yoga is an example of an activity that calms one's entire body and nerves. According to a study on well-being by Richards, Campania, and Muse-Burke, "mindfulness is considered to be a purposeful state, it may be that those who practice it belief in its importance and value being mindful, so that valuing of self-care activities may influence the intentional component of mindfulness." Akin to surgery, sometimes the body must be further damaged, before it can properly heal 
Mental health is conventionally defined as a hybrid of the absence of a mental disorder and the presence of well-being. Focus is increasing on preventing mental disorders.
Prevention is beginning to appear in mental health strategies, including the 2004 WHO report "Prevention of Mental Disorders", the 2008 EU "Pact for Mental Health" and the 2011 US National Prevention Strategy. Some commentators have argued that a pragmatic and practical approach to mental disorder prevention at work would be to treat it the same way as physical injury prevention.
Prevention of a disorder at a young age may significantly decrease the chances that a child will have a disorder later in life, and shall be the most efficient and effective measure from a public health perspective. Prevention may require the regular consultation of a physician for at least twice a year to detect any signs that reveal any mental health concerns.
Additionally, social media is becoming a resource for prevention. In 2004, the Mental Health Services Act began to fund marketing initiatives to educate the public on mental health. This California-based project is working to combat the negative perception with mental health and reduce the stigma associated with it. While social media can benefit mental health, it can also lead to deterioration if not managed properly. Limiting social media intake is beneficial.
Studies report that patients in mental health care who can access and read their Electronic Health Records (EHR) or Open Notes online experience increased understanding of their mental health, feeling in control of their care, and enhanced trust in their clinicians. Patients' also reported feelings of greater validation, engagement, remembering their care plan, and acquiring a better awareness of potential side effects of their medications, when reading their mental health notes. Other common experiences were that shared mental health notes enhance patient empowerment and augment patient autonomy.
Furthermore, recent studies have shown that social media is an effective way to draw attention to mental health issues. By collecting data from Twitter, researchers found that social media presence is heightened after an event relating to behavioral health occurs. Researchers continue to find effective ways to use social media to bring more awareness to mental health issues through online campaigns in other sites such as Facebook and Instagram.


=== Care navigation ===

Mental health care navigation helps to guide patients and families through the fragmented, often confusing mental health industries. Care navigators work closely with patients and families through discussion and collaboration to provide information on best therapies as well as referrals to practitioners and facilities specializing in particular forms of emotional improvement. The difference between therapy and care navigation is that the care navigation process provides information and directs patients to therapy rather than providing therapy. Still, care navigators may offer diagnosis and treatment planning. Though many care navigators are also trained therapists and doctors. Care navigation is the link between the patient and the below therapies. A clear recognition that mental health requires medical intervention was demonstrated in a study by Kessler et al. of the prevalence and treatment of mental disorders from 1990 to 2003 in the United States. Despite the prevalence of mental health disorders remaining unchanged during this period, the number of patients seeking treatment for mental disorders increased threefold.


=== Methods ===


==== Pharmacotherapy ====
Pharmacotherapy is a therapy that uses pharmaceutical drugs. Pharmacotherapy is used in the treatment of mental illness through the use of antidepressants, benzodiazepines, and the use of elements such as lithium. It can only be prescribed by a medical professional trained in the field of Psychiatry.


==== Physical activity ====
Physical exercise can improve mental and physical health. Playing sports, walking, cycling, or doing any form of physical activity trigger the production of various hormones, sometimes including endorphins, which can elevate a person's mood.
Studies have shown that in some cases, physical activity can have the same impact as antidepressants when treating depression and anxiety.
Moreover, cessation of physical exercise may have adverse effects on some mental health conditions, such as depression and anxiety. This could lead to different negative outcomes such as obesity, skewed body image and many health risks associated with mental illnesses. Exercise can improve mental health but it should not be used as an alternative to therapy.


==== Activity therapies ====
Activity therapies also called recreation therapy and occupational therapy, promote healing through active engagement. An example of occupational therapy would be promoting an activity that improves daily life, such as self-care or improving hobbies.
Each of these therapies have proven to improve mental health and have resulted in healthier, happier individuals. In recent years, for example, coloring has been recognized as an activity that has been proven to significantly lower the levels of depressive symptoms and anxiety in many studies.


==== Expressive therapies ====
Expressive therapies or creative arts therapies are a form of psychotherapy that involves the arts or artmaking. These therapies include art therapy, music therapy, drama therapy, dance therapy, and poetry therapy. It has been proven that music therapy is an effective way of helping people with a mental health disorder. Drama therapy is approved by NICE for the treatment of psychosis.


==== Psychotherapy ====

Psychotherapy is the general term for the scientific based treatment of mental health issues based on modern medicine. It includes a number of schools, such as gestalt therapy, psychoanalysis, cognitive behavioral therapy, psychedelic therapy, transpersonal psychology/psychotherapy, and dialectical behavioral therapy.
Group therapy involves any type of therapy that takes place in a setting involving multiple people. It can include psychodynamic groups, expressive therapy groups, support groups (including the Twelve-step program), problem-solving and psychoeducation groups.


==== Self-compassion ====

According to Neff, self-compassion consists of three main positive components and their negative counterparts: Self-Kindness versus Self-Judgment, Common Humanity versus Isolation and Mindfulness versus Over-Identification. Furthermore, there is evidence from a study by Shin & Lin suggesting specific components of self-compassion can predict specific dimensions of positive mental health (emotional, social, and psychological well-being).


==== Social-emotional learning ====

The Collaborative for academic, social, emotional learning (CASEL) addresses five broad and interrelated areas of competence and highlights examples for each: self-awareness, self-management, social awareness, relationship skills, and responsible decision-making. A meta-analysis was done by Alexendru Boncu, Iuliana Costeau, & Mihaela Minulescu (2017) looking at social-emotional learning (SEL) studies and the effects on emotional and behavior outcomes. They found a small but significant effect size (across the studies looked into) for externalized problems and social-emotional skills.


==== Meditation ====

The practice of mindfulness meditation has several potential mental health benefits, such as bringing about reductions in depression, anxiety and stress. Mindfulness meditation may also be effective in treating substance use disorders.


==== Lucid dreaming ====
Lucid dreaming has been found to be associated with greater mental well-being. It also was not associated with poorer sleep quality nor with cognitive dissociation. There is also some evidence lucid dreaming therapy can help with nightmare reduction.


==== Mental fitness ====
Mental fitness is a mental health movement that encourages people to intentionally regulate and maintain their emotional wellbeing through friendship, regular human contact, and activities that include meditation, calming exercises, aerobic exercise, mindfulness, having a routine and maintaining adequate sleep. Mental fitness is intended to build resilience against every-day mental and potentially physical health challenges to prevent an escalation of anxiety, depression, and suicidal ideation. This can help people, including older adults with health challenges, to more effectively cope with the escalation of those feelings if they occur.


==== Spiritual counseling ====
Spiritual counsellors meet with people in need to offer comfort and support and to help them gain a better understanding of their issues and develop a problem-solving relation with spirituality. These types of counselors deliver care based on spiritual, psychological and theological principles.


== Laws and public health policies ==

There are many factors that influence mental health including:

Mental illness, disability, and suicide are ultimately the result of a combination of biology, environment, and access to and utilization of mental health treatment.
Public health policies can influence access and utilization, which subsequently may improve mental health and help to progress the negative consequences of depression and its associated disability.


=== United States ===
Emotional mental illnesses is a particular concern in the United States since the U.S. has the highest annual prevalence rates (26 percent) for mental illnesses among a comparison of 14 developing and developed countries. While approximately 80 percent of all people in the United States with a mental disorder eventually receive some form of treatment, on average persons do not access care until nearly a decade following the development of their illness, and less than one-third of people who seek help receive minimally adequate care. The government offers everyone programs and services, but veterans receive the most help, there is certain eligibility criteria that has to be met.


==== Policies ====
Mental health policies in the United States have experienced four major reforms: the American asylum movement led by Dorothea Dix in 1843; the mental hygiene movement inspired by Clifford Beers in 1908; the deinstitutionalization started by Action for Mental Health in 1961; and the community support movement called for by The CMCH Act Amendments of 1975.
In 1843, Dorothea Dix submitted a Memorial to the Legislature of Massachusetts, describing the abusive treatment and horrible conditions received by the mentally ill patients in jails, cages, and almshouses. She revealed in her Memorial: "I proceed, gentlemen, briefly to call your attention to the present state of insane persons confined within this Commonwealth, in cages, closets, cellars, stalls, pens! Chained, naked, beaten with rods, and lashed into obedience...." Many asylums were built in that period, with high fences or walls separating the patients from other community members and strict rules regarding the entrance and exit. In 1866, a recommendation came to the New York State Legislature to establish a separate asylum for chronic mentally ill patients. Some hospitals placed the chronic patients into separate wings or wards, or different buildings.
In A Mind That Found Itself (1908) Clifford Whittingham Beers described the humiliating treatment he received and the deplorable conditions in the mental hospital. One year later, the National Committee for Mental Hygiene (NCMH) was founded by a small group of reform-minded scholars and scientists—including Beers himself—which marked the beginning of the "mental hygiene" movement. The movement emphasized the importance of childhood prevention. World War I catalyzed this idea with an additional emphasis on the impact of maladjustment, which convinced the hygienists that prevention was the only practical approach to handle mental health issues. However, prevention was not successful, especially for chronic illness; the condemnable conditions in the hospitals were even more prevalent, especially under the pressure of the increasing number of chronically ill and the influence of the depression.
In 1961, the Joint Commission on Mental Health published a report called Action for Mental Health, whose goal was for community clinic care to take on the burden of prevention and early intervention of the mental illness, therefore to leave space in the hospitals for severe and chronic patients. The court started to rule in favor of the patients' will on whether they should be forced to treatment. By 1977, 650 community mental health centers were built to cover 43 percent of the population and serve 1.9 million individuals a year, and the lengths of treatment decreased from 6 months to only 23 days. However, issues still existed. Due to inflation, especially in the 1970s, the community nursing homes received less money to support the care and treatment provided. Fewer than half of the planned centers were created, and new methods did not fully replace the old approaches to carry out its full capacity of treating power. Besides, the community helping system was not fully established to support the patients' housing, vocational opportunities, income supports, and other benefits. Many patients returned to welfare and criminal justice institutions, and more became homeless. The movement of deinstitutionalization was facing great challenges.
After realizing that simply changing the location of mental health care from the state hospitals to nursing houses was insufficient to implement the idea of deinstitutionalization, the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) in 1975 created the Community Support Program (CSP) to provide funds for communities to set up a comprehensive mental health service and supports to help the mentally ill patients integrate successfully in the society. The program stressed the importance of other supports in addition to medical care, including housing, living expenses, employment, transportation, and education; and set up new national priority for people with serious mental disorders. In addition, the Congress enacted the Mental Health Systems Act of 1980 to prioritize the service to the mentally ill and emphasize the expansion of services beyond just clinical care alone. Later in the 1980s, under the influence from the Congress and the Supreme Court, many programs started to help the patients regain their benefits. A new Medicaid service was also established to serve people who were diagnosed with a "chronic mental illness". People who were temporally hospitalized were also provided aid and care and a pre-release program was created to enable people to apply for reinstatement prior to discharge. Not until 1990, around 35 years after the start of the deinstitutionalization, did the first state hospital begin to close. The number of hospitals dropped from around 300 by over 40 in the 1990s, and finally a Report on Mental Health showed the efficacy of mental health treatment, giving a range of treatments available for patients to choose.
However, several critics maintain that deinstitutionalization has, from a mental health point of view, been a thoroughgoing failure. The seriously mentally ill are either homeless, or in prison; in either case (especially the latter), they are getting little or no mental health care. This failure is attributed to a number of reasons over which there is some degree of contention, although there is general agreement that community support programs have been ineffective at best, due to a lack of funding.
The 2011 National Prevention Strategy included mental and emotional well-being, with recommendations including better parenting and early intervention programs, which increase the likelihood of prevention programs being included in future US mental health policies. The NIMH is researching only suicide and HIV/AIDS prevention, but the National Prevention Strategy could lead to it focusing more broadly on longitudinal prevention studies.
In 2013, United States Representative Tim Murphy introduced the Helping Families in Mental Health Crisis Act, HR2646. The bipartisan bill went through substantial revision and was reintroduced in 2015 by Murphy and Congresswoman Eddie Bernice Johnson. In November 2015, it passed the Health Subcommittee by an 18–12 vote.


== See also ==

988 (telephone number)
Abnormal psychology
Emotional resilience
Ethnopsychopharmacology
Mental environment
Mental health day
Mental health during the COVID-19 pandemic
Mental health first aid
Mental health in education
Mental health in the workplace
Mental health of Asian Americans
Self-help groups for mental health
Social determinants of mental health
Social stigma
Suicide awareness
Telemental health
World Mental Health Day
Well-being


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Online Books by William Sweetser


== External links ==

 Quotations related to Mental health at Wikiquote
 Media related to Mental health at Wikimedia Commons
Mental Health by WHO
The Public Health Agency of Canada
"Mental health and substance abuse". WHO Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean.
National Institute of Mental Health (United States)
Health-EU Portal Mental Health in the EU
Mental Health Department of Health (United Kingdom)

Document similaire: History of mental healthcare (Similarité: 0.4400)
Mental health encompasses emotional, psychological, and social well-being, influencing cognition, perception, and behavior. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), it is a "state of well-being in which the individual realizes his or her abilities, can cope with the normal stresses of life, can work productively and fruitfully, and can contribute to his or her community". It likewise determines how an individual handles stress, interpersonal relationships, and decision-making. Mental health includes subjective well-being, perceived self-efficacy, autonomy, competence, intergenerational dependence,  and self-actualization of one's intellectual and emotional potential, among others.
From the perspectives of positive psychology or holism, mental health may include an individual's ability to enjoy life and to create a balance between life activities and efforts to achieve psychological resilience. Cultural differences, personal philosophy, subjective assessments, and competing professional theories all affect how one defines "mental health". Some early signs related to mental health difficulties are sleep irritation, lack of energy, lack of appetite, thinking of harming oneself or others, self-isolating (though introversion and isolation aren't necessarily unhealthy), and frequently zoning out.


== Mental disorders ==

Mental health, as defined by the Public Health Agency of Canada, is an individual's capacity to feel, think, and act in ways to achieve a better quality of life while respecting personal, social, and cultural boundaries. Impairment of any of these are risk factor for mental disorders, or mental illnesses, which are a component of mental health. In 2019, about 970 million people worldwide suffered from a mental disorder, with anxiety and depression being the most common. The number of people suffering from mental disorders has risen significantly throughout the years. Mental disorders are defined as health conditions that affect and alter cognitive functioning, emotional responses, and behavior associated with distress and/or impaired functioning. The ICD-11 is the global standard used to diagnose, treat, research, and report various mental disorders. In the United States, the DSM-5 is used as the classification system of mental disorders.
Mental health is associated with a number of lifestyle factors such as diet, exercise, stress, drug abuse, social connections and interactions. Psychiatrists, psychologists, licensed professional clinical counselors, social workers, nurse practitioners, and family physicians can help manage mental illness with treatments such as therapy, counseling, and medication.


== History ==


=== Early history ===

In the mid-19th century, William Sweetser was the first to coin the term mental hygiene, which can be seen as the precursor to contemporary approaches to work on promoting positive mental health. Isaac Ray, the fourth president of the American Psychiatric Association and one of its founders, further defined mental hygiene as "the art of preserving the mind against all incidents and influences calculated to deteriorate its qualities, impair its energies, or derange its movements".
In American history, mentally ill patients were thought to be religiously punished. This response persisted through the 1700s, along with the inhumane confinement and stigmatization of such individuals. Dorothea Dix (1802–1887) was an important figure in the development of the "mental hygiene" movement. Dix was a school teacher who endeavored to help people with mental disorders and to expose the sub-standard conditions into which they were put. This became known as the "mental hygiene movement". Before this movement, it was not uncommon that people affected by mental illness would be considerably neglected, often left alone in deplorable conditions without sufficient clothing. From 1840 to 1880, she won the support of the federal government to set up over 30 state psychiatric hospitals; however, they were understaffed, under-resourced, and were accused of violating human rights.
Emil Kraepelin in 1896 developed the taxonomy of mental disorders which has dominated the field for nearly 80 years. Later, the proposed disease model of abnormality was subjected to analysis and considered normality to be relative to the physical, geographical and cultural aspects of the defining group.
At the beginning of the 20th century, Clifford Beers founded "Mental Health America – National Committee for Mental Hygiene", after publication of his accounts as a patient in several lunatic asylums, A Mind That Found Itself, in 1908 and opened the first outpatient mental health clinic in the United States.
The mental hygiene movement, similar to the social hygiene movement, had at times been associated with advocating eugenics and sterilization of those considered too mentally deficient to be assisted into productive work and contented family life. In the post-WWII years, references to mental hygiene were gradually replaced by the term 'mental health' due to its positive aspect that evolves from the treatment of illness to preventive and promotive areas of healthcare.


==== Deinstitutionalization and transinstitutionalization ====
When US government-run hospitals were accused of violating human rights, advocates pushed for deinstitutionalization: the replacement of federal mental hospitals for community mental health services. The closure of state-provisioned psychiatric hospitals was enforced by the Community Mental Health Centers Act in 1963 that laid out terms in which only patients who posed an imminent danger to others or themselves could be admitted into state facilities. This was seen as an improvement from previous conditions. However, there remains a debate on the conditions of these community resources.
It has been proven that this transition was beneficial for many patients: there was an increase in overall satisfaction, a better quality of life, and more friendships between patients all at an affordable cost. This proved to be true only in the circumstance that treatment facilities had enough funding for staff and equipment as well as proper management. However, this idea is a polarizing issue. Critics of deinstitutionalization argue that poor living conditions prevailed, patients were lonely, and they did not acquire proper medical care in these treatment homes. Additionally, patients that were moved from state psychiatric care to nursing and residential homes had deficits in crucial aspects of their treatment. Some cases result in the shift of care from health workers to patients' families, where they do not have the proper funding or medical expertise to give proper care. On the other hand, patients that are treated in community mental health centers lack sufficient cancer testing, vaccinations, or otherwise regular medical check-ups.
Other critics of state deinstitutionalization argue that this was simply a transition to "transinstitutionalization", or the idea that prisons and state-provisioned hospitals are interdependent. In other words, patients become inmates. This draws on the Penrose Hypothesis of 1939, which theorized that there was an inverse relationship between prisons' population size and the number of psychiatric hospital beds. This means that populations that require psychiatric mental care will transition between institutions, which in this case, includes state psychiatric hospitals and criminal justice systems. Thus, a decrease in available psychiatric hospital beds occurred at the same time as an increase in inmates. Although some are skeptical that this is due to other external factors, others will reason this conclusion to a lack of empathy for the mentally ill. There is no argument for the social stigmatization of those with mental illnesses, they have been widely marginalized and discriminated against in society. In this source, researchers analyze how most compensation prisoners (detainees who are unable or unwilling to pay a fine for petty crimes) are unemployed, homeless, and with an extraordinarily high degree of mental illnesses and substance use disorders. Compensation prisoners then lose prospective job opportunities, face social marginalization, and lack access to resocialization programs, which ultimately facilitate reoffending. The research sheds light on how the mentally ill—and in this case, the poor—are further punished for certain circumstances that are beyond their control, and that this is a vicious cycle that repeats itself. Thus, prisons embody another state-provisioned mental hospital.
Families of patients, advocates, and mental health professionals still call for increase in more well-structured community facilities and treatment programs with a higher quality of long-term inpatient resources and care. With this more structured environment, the United States will continue with more access to mental health care and an increase in the overall treatment of the mentally ill.
However, there is still a lack of studies for mental health conditions (MHCs) to raise awareness, knowledge development, and attitudes toward seeking medical treatment for MHCs in Bangladesh. People in rural areas often seek treatment from the traditional healers and MHCs are sometimes considered a spiritual matter.


== Epidemiology ==

Mental illnesses are more common than cancer, diabetes, or heart disease. As of 2021, over 22 percent of all Americans over the age of 18 meet the criteria for having a mental illness. Evidence suggests that 970 million people worldwide have a mental disorder. Major depression ranks third among the top 10 leading causes of disease worldwide. By 2030, it is predicted to become the leading cause of disease worldwide. Over 700 thousand people commit suicide every year and around 14 million attempt it. A World Health Organization (WHO) report estimates the global cost of mental illness at nearly $2.5 trillion (two-thirds in indirect costs) in 2010, with a projected increase to over $6 trillion by 2030.
Evidence from the WHO suggests that nearly half of the world's population is affected by mental illness with an impact on their self-esteem, relationships and ability to function in everyday life. An individual's emotional health can impact their physical health. Poor mental health can lead to problems such as the inability to make adequate decisions and substance use disorders.
Good mental health can improve life quality whereas poor mental health can worsen it. According to Richards, Campania, & Muse-Burke, "There is growing evidence that is showing emotional abilities are associated with pro-social behaviors such as stress management and physical health." Their research also concluded that people who lack emotional expression are inclined to anti-social behaviors (e.g., substance use disorder and alcohol use disorder, physical fights, vandalism), which reflects one's mental health and suppressed emotions. Adults and children who face mental illness may experience social stigma, which can exacerbate the issues.


=== Global prevalence ===

Mental health can be seen as a continuum, where an individual's mental health may have many different possible values. Mental wellness is viewed as a positive attribute; this definition of mental health highlights emotional well-being, the capacity to live a full and creative life, and the flexibility to deal with life's inevitable challenges. Some discussions are formulated in terms of contentment or happiness. Many therapeutic systems and self-help books offer methods and philosophies espousing strategies and techniques vaunted as effective for further improving the mental wellness. Positive psychology is increasingly prominent in mental health.
A holistic model of mental health generally includes concepts based upon anthropological, educational, psychological, religious, and sociological perspectives. There are also models as theoretical perspectives from personality, social, clinical, health and developmental psychology.
The tripartite model of mental well-being views mental well-being as encompassing three components of emotional well-being, social well-being, and psychological well-being. Emotional well-being is defined as having high levels of positive emotions, whereas social and psychological well-being are defined as the presence of psychological and social skills and abilities that contribute to optimal functioning in daily life. The model has received empirical support across cultures. The Mental Health Continuum-Short Form (MHC-SF) is the most widely used scale to measure the tripartite model of mental well-being.


=== Demographics ===


==== Children and young adults ====

As of 2019, about one in seven of the world's 10–19 year olds experienced a mental health disorder; about 165 million young people in total. A person's teenage years are a unique period where much crucial psychological development occurs, and is also a time of increased vulnerability to the development of adverse mental health conditions. More than half of mental health conditions start before a child reaches 20 years of age, with onset occurring in adolescence much more frequently than it does in early childhood or adulthood. Many such cases go undetected and untreated.
In the United States alone, in 2021, at least roughly 17.5% of the population (ages 18 and older) were recorded as having a mental illness. The comparison between reports and statistics of mental health issues in newer generations (18–25 years old to 26–49 years old) and the older generation (50 years or older) signifies an increase in mental health issues as only 15% of the older generation reported a mental health issue whereas the newer generations reported 33.7% (18-25) and 28.1% (26-49).  The role of caregivers for youth with mental health needs is valuable, and caregivers benefit most when they have sufficient psychoeducation and peer support. Depression is one of the leading causes of illness and disability among adolescents. Suicide is the fourth leading cause of death in 15-19-year-olds. Exposure to childhood trauma can cause mental health disorders and poor academic achievement. Ignoring mental health conditions in adolescents can impact adulthood. 50% of preschool children show a natural reduction in behavioral problems. The remaining experience long-term consequences. It impairs physical and mental health and limits opportunities to live fulfilling lives. A result of depression during adolescence and adulthood may be substance abuse. The average age of onset is between 11 and 14 years for depressive disorders. Only approximately 25% of children with behavioral problems refer to medical services. The majority of children go untreated.


==== Homeless population ====

Mental illness is thought to be highly prevalent among homeless populations, though access to proper diagnoses is limited. An article written by Lisa Goodman and her colleagues summarized Smith's research into PTSD in homeless single women and mothers in St. Louis, Missouri, which found that 53% of the respondents met diagnostic criteria, and which describes homelessness as a risk factor for mental illness. At least two commonly reported symptoms of psychological trauma, social disaffiliation and learned helplessness are highly prevalent among homeless individuals and families.
While mental illness is prevalent, people infrequently receive appropriate care. Case management linked to other services is an effective care approach for improving symptoms in people experiencing homelessness. Case management reduced admission to hospitals, and it reduced substance use by those with substance abuse problems more than typical care.


==== Immigrants and refugees ====

States that produce refugees are sites of social upheaval, civil war, even genocide. Most refugees experience trauma. It can be in the form of torture, sexual assault, family fragmentation, and death of loved ones.
Refugees and immigrants experience psychosocial stressors after resettlement. These include discrimination, lack of economic stability, and social isolation causing emotional distress. For example, Not far into the 1900s, campaigns targeting Japanese immigrants were being formed that inhibited their ability to participate in U.S life, painting them as a threat to the American working-class. They were subject to prejudice and slandered by American media as well as anti-Japanese legislation being implemented. For refugees family reunification can be one of the primary needs to improve quality of life. Post-migration trauma is a cause of depressive disorders and psychological distress for immigrants.


==== Cultural and religious considerations ====
Mental health is a socially constructed concept; different societies, groups, cultures (both ethnic and national/regional), institutions, and professions have very different ways of conceptualizing its nature and causes, determining what is mentally healthy, and deciding what interventions, if any, are appropriate. Thus, different professionals will have different cultural, class, political and religious backgrounds, which will impact the methodology applied during treatment. In the context of deaf mental health care, it is necessary for professionals to have cultural competency of deaf and hard of hearing people and to understand how to properly rely on trained, qualified, and certified interpreters when working with culturally Deaf clients.
Research has shown that there is stigma attached to mental illness. Due to such stigma, individuals may resist labeling and may be driven to respond to mental health diagnoses with denialism. Family caregivers of individuals with mental disorders may also suffer discrimination or face stigma.
Addressing and eliminating the social stigma and perceived stigma attached to mental illness has been recognized as crucial to education and awareness surrounding mental health issues. In the United Kingdom, the Royal College of Psychiatrists organized the campaign Changing Minds (1998–2003) to help reduce stigma, while in the United States, efforts by entities such as the Born This Way Foundation and The Manic Monologues specifically focus on removing the stigma surrounding mental illness. The National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI) is a U.S. institution founded in 1979 to represent and advocate for those struggling with mental health issues. NAMI helps to educate about mental illnesses and health issues, while also working to eliminate stigma attached to these disorders.
Many mental health professionals are beginning to, or already understand, the importance of competency in religious diversity and spirituality, or the lack thereof. They are also partaking in cultural training to better understand which interventions work best for these different groups of people. The American Psychological Association explicitly states that religion must be respected. Education in spiritual and religious matters is also required by the American Psychiatric Association, however, far less attention is paid to the damage that more rigid, fundamentalist faiths commonly practiced in the United States can cause. This theme has been widely politicized in 2018 such as with the creation of the Religious Liberty Task Force in July of that year. Also, many providers and practitioners in the United States are only beginning to realize that the institution of mental healthcare lacks knowledge and competence of many non-Western cultures, leaving providers in the United States ill-equipped to treat patients from different cultures.


=== Occupations ===


=== Occupational therapy ===
Occupational therapy practitioners aim to improve and enable a client or group's participation in meaningful, everyday occupations. In this sense, occupation is defined as any activity that "occupies one's time". Examples of those activities include daily tasks (dressing, bathing, eating, house chores, driving, etc.), sleep and rest, education, work, play, leisure (hobbies), and social interactions. The OT profession offers a vast range of services for all stages of life in a myriad of practice settings, though the foundations of OT come from mental health. Community support for mental health through expert-moderated support groups can aid those who want to recover from mental illness or otherwise improve their emotional well-being.
OT services focused on mental health can be provided to persons, groups, and populations  across the lifespan and experiencing varying levels of mental health performance. For example, occupational therapy practitioners provide mental health services in school systems, military environments, hospitals, outpatient clinics, and inpatient mental health rehabilitation settings. Interventions or support can be provided directly through specific treatment interventions or indirectly by providing consultation to businesses, schools, or other larger groups to incorporate mental health strategies on a programmatic level. Even people who are mentally healthy can benefit from the health promotion and additional prevention strategies to reduce the impact of difficult situations.
The interventions focus on positive functioning, sensory strategies, managing emotions, interpersonal relationships, sleep, community engagement, and other cognitive skills (i.e. visual-perceptual skills, attention, memory, arousal/energy management, etc.).


==== Mental health in social work ====

Social work in mental health, also called psychiatric social work, is a process where an individual in a setting is helped to attain freedom from overlapping internal and external problems (social and economic situations, family and other relationships, the physical and organizational environment, psychiatric symptoms, etc.). It aims for harmony, quality of life, self-actualization and personal adaptation across all systems. Psychiatric social workers are mental health professionals that can assist patients and their family members in coping with both mental health issues and various economic or social problems caused by mental illness or psychiatric dysfunctions and to attain improved mental health and well-being. They are vital members of the treatment teams in Departments of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences in hospitals. They are employed in both outpatient and inpatient settings of a hospital, nursing homes, state and local governments, substance use clinics, correctional facilities, health care services, private practice, etc.
In the United States, social workers provide most of the mental health services. According to government sources, 60 percent of mental health professionals are clinically trained social workers, 10 percent are psychiatrists, 23 percent are psychologists, and 5 percent are psychiatric nurses.
Mental health social workers in Japan have professional knowledge of health and welfare and skills essential for person's well-being. Their social work training enables them as a professional to carry out Consultation assistance for mental disabilities and their social reintegration; Consultation regarding the rehabilitation of the victims; Advice and guidance for post-discharge residence and re-employment after hospitalized care, for major life events in regular life, money and self-management and other relevant matters to equip them to adapt in daily life. Social workers provide individual home visits for mentally ill and do welfare services available, with specialized training a range of procedural services are coordinated for home, workplace and school. In an administrative relationship, Psychiatric social workers provides consultation, leadership, conflict management and work direction. Psychiatric social workers who provides assessment and psychosocial interventions function as a clinician, counselor and municipal staff of the health centers.


== Risk factors and causes of mental health problems ==

There are many things that can contribute to mental health problems, including biological factors, genetic factors, life experiences (such as psychological trauma or abuse), and a family history of mental health problems.


=== Biological factors ===
According to the National Institute of Health Curriculum Supplement Series book, most scientists believe that changes in neurotransmitters can cause mental illnesses. In the section "The Biology of Mental Illnesses" the issue is explained in detail, "...there may be disruptions in the neurotransmitters dopamine, glutamate, and norepinephrine in individuals who have schizophrenia".


=== Demographic factors ===
Gender, age, ethnicity, life expectancy, longevity, population density, and community diversity are all demographic characteristics that can increase the risk and severity of mental disorders. Existing evidence demonstrates that the female gender is connected with an elevated risk of depression at different phases of life, commencing in adolescence in different contexts. Females, for example, have a higher risk of anxiety and eating disorders, whereas males have a higher chance of substance abuse and behavioral and developmental issues. This does not imply that women are less likely to suffer from developmental disorders such autism spectrum disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, Tourette syndrome, or early-onset schizophrenia. Ethnicity and ethnic heterogeneity have also been identified as risk factors for the prevalence of mental disorders, with minority groups being at a higher risk due to discrimination and exclusion.
Unemployment has been shown to hurt an individual's emotional well-being, self-esteem, and more broadly their mental health. Increasing unemployment has been shown to have a significant impact on mental health, predominantly depressive disorders. This is an important consideration when reviewing the triggers for mental health disorders in any population survey. According to a 2009 meta-analysis by Paul and Moser, countries with high income inequality and poor unemployment protections experience worse mental health outcomes among the unemployed.

Emotional mental disorders are a leading cause of disabilities worldwide. Investigating the degree and severity of untreated emotional mental disorders throughout the world is a top priority of the World Mental Health (WMH) survey initiative, which was created in 1998 by the World Health Organization (WHO). "Neuropsychiatric disorders are the leading causes of disability worldwide, accounting for 37% of all healthy life years lost through disease. These disorders are most destructive to low and middle-income countries due to their inability to provide their citizens with proper aid. Despite modern treatment and rehabilitation for emotional mental health disorders, "even economically advantaged societies have competing priorities and budgetary constraints".
Unhappily married couples suffer 3–25 times the risk of developing clinical depression.
The World Mental Health survey initiative has suggested a plan for countries to redesign their mental health care systems to best allocate resources.
"A first step is documentation of services being used and the extent and nature of unmet treatment needs. A second step could be to do a cross-national comparison of service use and unmet needs in countries with different mental health care systems. Such comparisons can help to uncover optimum financing, national policies, and delivery systems for mental health care."
Knowledge of how to provide effective emotional mental health care has become imperative worldwide. Unfortunately, most countries have insufficient data to guide decisions, absent or competing visions for resources, and near-constant pressures to cut insurance and entitlements. WMH surveys were done in Africa (Nigeria, South Africa), the Americas (Colombia, Mexico, United States), Asia and the Pacific (Japan, New Zealand, Beijing and Shanghai in the People's Republic of China), Europe (Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Spain, Ukraine), and the Middle East (Israel, Lebanon). Countries were classified with World Bank criteria as low-income (Nigeria), lower-middle-income (China, Colombia, South Africa, Ukraine), higher middle-income (Lebanon, Mexico), and high-income.
The coordinated surveys on emotional mental health disorders, their severity, and treatments were implemented in the aforementioned countries. These surveys assessed the frequency, types, and adequacy of mental health service use in 17 countries in which WMH surveys are complete. The WMH also examined unmet needs for treatment in strata defined by the seriousness of mental disorders. Their research showed that "the number of respondents using any 12-month mental health service was generally lower in developing than in developed countries, and the proportion receiving services tended to correspond to countries' percentages of gross domestic product spent on health care".
"High levels of unmet need worldwide are not surprising, since WHO Project ATLAS' findings of much lower mental health expenditures than was suggested by the magnitude of burdens from mental illnesses. Generally, unmet needs in low-income and middle-income countries might be attributable to these nations spending reduced amounts (usually <1%) of already diminished health budgets on mental health care, and they rely heavily on out-of-pocket spending by citizens who are ill-equipped for it".


=== Stress ===

The Centre for Addiction and Mental Health discusses how a certain amount of stress is a normal part of daily life. Small doses of stress help people meet deadlines, be prepared for presentations, be productive and arrive on time for important events. However, long-term stress can become harmful. When stress becomes overwhelming and prolonged, the risks for mental health problems and medical problems increase." Also on that note, some studies have found language to deteriorate mental health and even harm humans.
The impact of a stressful environment has also been highlighted by different models. Mental health has often been understood from the lens of the vulnerability-stress model. In that context, stressful situations may contribute to a preexisting vulnerability to negative mental health outcomes being realized. On the other hand, the differential susceptibility hypothesis suggests that mental health outcomes are better explained by an increased sensitivity to the environment than by vulnerability. For example, it was found that children scoring higher on observer-rated environmental sensitivity often derive more harm from low-quality parenting, but also more benefits from high-quality parenting than those children scoring lower on that measure.


=== Poverty ===


=== Environmental factors ===


== Prevention and promotion ==

"The terms mental health promotion and prevention have often been confused. Promotion is defined as intervening to optimize positive mental health by addressing determinants of positive mental health (i.e. protective factors) before a specific mental health problem has been identified, with the ultimate goal of improving the positive mental health of the population. Mental health prevention is defined as intervening to minimize mental health problems (i.e. risk factors) by addressing determinants of mental health problems before a specific mental health problem has been identified in the individual, group, or population of focus with the ultimate goal of reducing the number of future mental health problems in the population."
In order to improve mental health, the root of the issue has to be resolved. "Prevention emphasizes the avoidance of risk factors; promotion aims to enhance an individual's ability to achieve a positive sense of self-esteem, mastery, well-being, and social inclusion." Mental health promotion attempts to increase protective factors and healthy behaviors that can help prevent the onset of a diagnosable mental disorder and reduce risk factors that can lead to the development of a mental disorder. Yoga is an example of an activity that calms one's entire body and nerves. According to a study on well-being by Richards, Campania, and Muse-Burke, "mindfulness is considered to be a purposeful state, it may be that those who practice it belief in its importance and value being mindful, so that valuing of self-care activities may influence the intentional component of mindfulness." Akin to surgery, sometimes the body must be further damaged, before it can properly heal 
Mental health is conventionally defined as a hybrid of the absence of a mental disorder and the presence of well-being. Focus is increasing on preventing mental disorders.
Prevention is beginning to appear in mental health strategies, including the 2004 WHO report "Prevention of Mental Disorders", the 2008 EU "Pact for Mental Health" and the 2011 US National Prevention Strategy. Some commentators have argued that a pragmatic and practical approach to mental disorder prevention at work would be to treat it the same way as physical injury prevention.
Prevention of a disorder at a young age may significantly decrease the chances that a child will have a disorder later in life, and shall be the most efficient and effective measure from a public health perspective. Prevention may require the regular consultation of a physician for at least twice a year to detect any signs that reveal any mental health concerns.
Additionally, social media is becoming a resource for prevention. In 2004, the Mental Health Services Act began to fund marketing initiatives to educate the public on mental health. This California-based project is working to combat the negative perception with mental health and reduce the stigma associated with it. While social media can benefit mental health, it can also lead to deterioration if not managed properly. Limiting social media intake is beneficial.
Studies report that patients in mental health care who can access and read their Electronic Health Records (EHR) or Open Notes online experience increased understanding of their mental health, feeling in control of their care, and enhanced trust in their clinicians. Patients' also reported feelings of greater validation, engagement, remembering their care plan, and acquiring a better awareness of potential side effects of their medications, when reading their mental health notes. Other common experiences were that shared mental health notes enhance patient empowerment and augment patient autonomy.
Furthermore, recent studies have shown that social media is an effective way to draw attention to mental health issues. By collecting data from Twitter, researchers found that social media presence is heightened after an event relating to behavioral health occurs. Researchers continue to find effective ways to use social media to bring more awareness to mental health issues through online campaigns in other sites such as Facebook and Instagram.


=== Care navigation ===

Mental health care navigation helps to guide patients and families through the fragmented, often confusing mental health industries. Care navigators work closely with patients and families through discussion and collaboration to provide information on best therapies as well as referrals to practitioners and facilities specializing in particular forms of emotional improvement. The difference between therapy and care navigation is that the care navigation process provides information and directs patients to therapy rather than providing therapy. Still, care navigators may offer diagnosis and treatment planning. Though many care navigators are also trained therapists and doctors. Care navigation is the link between the patient and the below therapies. A clear recognition that mental health requires medical intervention was demonstrated in a study by Kessler et al. of the prevalence and treatment of mental disorders from 1990 to 2003 in the United States. Despite the prevalence of mental health disorders remaining unchanged during this period, the number of patients seeking treatment for mental disorders increased threefold.


=== Methods ===


==== Pharmacotherapy ====
Pharmacotherapy is a therapy that uses pharmaceutical drugs. Pharmacotherapy is used in the treatment of mental illness through the use of antidepressants, benzodiazepines, and the use of elements such as lithium. It can only be prescribed by a medical professional trained in the field of Psychiatry.


==== Physical activity ====
Physical exercise can improve mental and physical health. Playing sports, walking, cycling, or doing any form of physical activity trigger the production of various hormones, sometimes including endorphins, which can elevate a person's mood.
Studies have shown that in some cases, physical activity can have the same impact as antidepressants when treating depression and anxiety.
Moreover, cessation of physical exercise may have adverse effects on some mental health conditions, such as depression and anxiety. This could lead to different negative outcomes such as obesity, skewed body image and many health risks associated with mental illnesses. Exercise can improve mental health but it should not be used as an alternative to therapy.


==== Activity therapies ====
Activity therapies also called recreation therapy and occupational therapy, promote healing through active engagement. An example of occupational therapy would be promoting an activity that improves daily life, such as self-care or improving hobbies.
Each of these therapies have proven to improve mental health and have resulted in healthier, happier individuals. In recent years, for example, coloring has been recognized as an activity that has been proven to significantly lower the levels of depressive symptoms and anxiety in many studies.


==== Expressive therapies ====
Expressive therapies or creative arts therapies are a form of psychotherapy that involves the arts or artmaking. These therapies include art therapy, music therapy, drama therapy, dance therapy, and poetry therapy. It has been proven that music therapy is an effective way of helping people with a mental health disorder. Drama therapy is approved by NICE for the treatment of psychosis.


==== Psychotherapy ====

Psychotherapy is the general term for the scientific based treatment of mental health issues based on modern medicine. It includes a number of schools, such as gestalt therapy, psychoanalysis, cognitive behavioral therapy, psychedelic therapy, transpersonal psychology/psychotherapy, and dialectical behavioral therapy.
Group therapy involves any type of therapy that takes place in a setting involving multiple people. It can include psychodynamic groups, expressive therapy groups, support groups (including the Twelve-step program), problem-solving and psychoeducation groups.


==== Self-compassion ====

According to Neff, self-compassion consists of three main positive components and their negative counterparts: Self-Kindness versus Self-Judgment, Common Humanity versus Isolation and Mindfulness versus Over-Identification. Furthermore, there is evidence from a study by Shin & Lin suggesting specific components of self-compassion can predict specific dimensions of positive mental health (emotional, social, and psychological well-being).


==== Social-emotional learning ====

The Collaborative for academic, social, emotional learning (CASEL) addresses five broad and interrelated areas of competence and highlights examples for each: self-awareness, self-management, social awareness, relationship skills, and responsible decision-making. A meta-analysis was done by Alexendru Boncu, Iuliana Costeau, & Mihaela Minulescu (2017) looking at social-emotional learning (SEL) studies and the effects on emotional and behavior outcomes. They found a small but significant effect size (across the studies looked into) for externalized problems and social-emotional skills.


==== Meditation ====

The practice of mindfulness meditation has several potential mental health benefits, such as bringing about reductions in depression, anxiety and stress. Mindfulness meditation may also be effective in treating substance use disorders.


==== Lucid dreaming ====
Lucid dreaming has been found to be associated with greater mental well-being. It also was not associated with poorer sleep quality nor with cognitive dissociation. There is also some evidence lucid dreaming therapy can help with nightmare reduction.


==== Mental fitness ====
Mental fitness is a mental health movement that encourages people to intentionally regulate and maintain their emotional wellbeing through friendship, regular human contact, and activities that include meditation, calming exercises, aerobic exercise, mindfulness, having a routine and maintaining adequate sleep. Mental fitness is intended to build resilience against every-day mental and potentially physical health challenges to prevent an escalation of anxiety, depression, and suicidal ideation. This can help people, including older adults with health challenges, to more effectively cope with the escalation of those feelings if they occur.


==== Spiritual counseling ====
Spiritual counsellors meet with people in need to offer comfort and support and to help them gain a better understanding of their issues and develop a problem-solving relation with spirituality. These types of counselors deliver care based on spiritual, psychological and theological principles.


== Laws and public health policies ==

There are many factors that influence mental health including:

Mental illness, disability, and suicide are ultimately the result of a combination of biology, environment, and access to and utilization of mental health treatment.
Public health policies can influence access and utilization, which subsequently may improve mental health and help to progress the negative consequences of depression and its associated disability.


=== United States ===
Emotional mental illnesses is a particular concern in the United States since the U.S. has the highest annual prevalence rates (26 percent) for mental illnesses among a comparison of 14 developing and developed countries. While approximately 80 percent of all people in the United States with a mental disorder eventually receive some form of treatment, on average persons do not access care until nearly a decade following the development of their illness, and less than one-third of people who seek help receive minimally adequate care. The government offers everyone programs and services, but veterans receive the most help, there is certain eligibility criteria that has to be met.


==== Policies ====
Mental health policies in the United States have experienced four major reforms: the American asylum movement led by Dorothea Dix in 1843; the mental hygiene movement inspired by Clifford Beers in 1908; the deinstitutionalization started by Action for Mental Health in 1961; and the community support movement called for by The CMCH Act Amendments of 1975.
In 1843, Dorothea Dix submitted a Memorial to the Legislature of Massachusetts, describing the abusive treatment and horrible conditions received by the mentally ill patients in jails, cages, and almshouses. She revealed in her Memorial: "I proceed, gentlemen, briefly to call your attention to the present state of insane persons confined within this Commonwealth, in cages, closets, cellars, stalls, pens! Chained, naked, beaten with rods, and lashed into obedience...." Many asylums were built in that period, with high fences or walls separating the patients from other community members and strict rules regarding the entrance and exit. In 1866, a recommendation came to the New York State Legislature to establish a separate asylum for chronic mentally ill patients. Some hospitals placed the chronic patients into separate wings or wards, or different buildings.
In A Mind That Found Itself (1908) Clifford Whittingham Beers described the humiliating treatment he received and the deplorable conditions in the mental hospital. One year later, the National Committee for Mental Hygiene (NCMH) was founded by a small group of reform-minded scholars and scientists—including Beers himself—which marked the beginning of the "mental hygiene" movement. The movement emphasized the importance of childhood prevention. World War I catalyzed this idea with an additional emphasis on the impact of maladjustment, which convinced the hygienists that prevention was the only practical approach to handle mental health issues. However, prevention was not successful, especially for chronic illness; the condemnable conditions in the hospitals were even more prevalent, especially under the pressure of the increasing number of chronically ill and the influence of the depression.
In 1961, the Joint Commission on Mental Health published a report called Action for Mental Health, whose goal was for community clinic care to take on the burden of prevention and early intervention of the mental illness, therefore to leave space in the hospitals for severe and chronic patients. The court started to rule in favor of the patients' will on whether they should be forced to treatment. By 1977, 650 community mental health centers were built to cover 43 percent of the population and serve 1.9 million individuals a year, and the lengths of treatment decreased from 6 months to only 23 days. However, issues still existed. Due to inflation, especially in the 1970s, the community nursing homes received less money to support the care and treatment provided. Fewer than half of the planned centers were created, and new methods did not fully replace the old approaches to carry out its full capacity of treating power. Besides, the community helping system was not fully established to support the patients' housing, vocational opportunities, income supports, and other benefits. Many patients returned to welfare and criminal justice institutions, and more became homeless. The movement of deinstitutionalization was facing great challenges.
After realizing that simply changing the location of mental health care from the state hospitals to nursing houses was insufficient to implement the idea of deinstitutionalization, the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) in 1975 created the Community Support Program (CSP) to provide funds for communities to set up a comprehensive mental health service and supports to help the mentally ill patients integrate successfully in the society. The program stressed the importance of other supports in addition to medical care, including housing, living expenses, employment, transportation, and education; and set up new national priority for people with serious mental disorders. In addition, the Congress enacted the Mental Health Systems Act of 1980 to prioritize the service to the mentally ill and emphasize the expansion of services beyond just clinical care alone. Later in the 1980s, under the influence from the Congress and the Supreme Court, many programs started to help the patients regain their benefits. A new Medicaid service was also established to serve people who were diagnosed with a "chronic mental illness". People who were temporally hospitalized were also provided aid and care and a pre-release program was created to enable people to apply for reinstatement prior to discharge. Not until 1990, around 35 years after the start of the deinstitutionalization, did the first state hospital begin to close. The number of hospitals dropped from around 300 by over 40 in the 1990s, and finally a Report on Mental Health showed the efficacy of mental health treatment, giving a range of treatments available for patients to choose.
However, several critics maintain that deinstitutionalization has, from a mental health point of view, been a thoroughgoing failure. The seriously mentally ill are either homeless, or in prison; in either case (especially the latter), they are getting little or no mental health care. This failure is attributed to a number of reasons over which there is some degree of contention, although there is general agreement that community support programs have been ineffective at best, due to a lack of funding.
The 2011 National Prevention Strategy included mental and emotional well-being, with recommendations including better parenting and early intervention programs, which increase the likelihood of prevention programs being included in future US mental health policies. The NIMH is researching only suicide and HIV/AIDS prevention, but the National Prevention Strategy could lead to it focusing more broadly on longitudinal prevention studies.
In 2013, United States Representative Tim Murphy introduced the Helping Families in Mental Health Crisis Act, HR2646. The bipartisan bill went through substantial revision and was reintroduced in 2015 by Murphy and Congresswoman Eddie Bernice Johnson. In November 2015, it passed the Health Subcommittee by an 18–12 vote.


== See also ==

988 (telephone number)
Abnormal psychology
Emotional resilience
Ethnopsychopharmacology
Mental environment
Mental health day
Mental health during the COVID-19 pandemic
Mental health first aid
Mental health in education
Mental health in the workplace
Mental health of Asian Americans
Self-help groups for mental health
Social determinants of mental health
Social stigma
Suicide awareness
Telemental health
World Mental Health Day
Well-being


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Online Books by William Sweetser


== External links ==

 Quotations related to Mental health at Wikiquote
 Media related to Mental health at Wikimedia Commons
Mental Health by WHO
The Public Health Agency of Canada
"Mental health and substance abuse". WHO Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean.
National Institute of Mental Health (United States)
Health-EU Portal Mental Health in the EU
Mental Health Department of Health (United Kingdom)

